1 
 
 
Blockchain Technology in Judiciary 
 
 
 
A Concept Note  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Center of Excellence in Blockchain Technology 
National Informatics Centre 
Bengaluru 
2 
 
Table of Contents 
Serial 
No 
Topic 
Page 
No 
1
Background
3-4
2 
Blockchain Technology    
4 
3 
Center of Excellence in Blockchain Technology 
5 
4 
Use of Blockchain Technology in Judiciary 
5-7 
5
Technology Decision 
8
6 
Solution Architecture 
 
8 
7 
Verification  
9 
8
Conclusion 
9
9 
Annexure 
10-15 
 
 
 
3 
 
Background     
The Indian Judiciary has been one of the early adopters of ICT.  The Indian 
Judicial system comprises of the Supreme Court, High Courts, District and 
Tehsil courts.  The e-Courts system has facilitated all the courts in India to 
record the case details, facilitate easy creation of documents such as 
summons, maintain a ledger of the certified copy requests / issued and a 
ledger for judicial deposits made by the party. The Judgments are digitally 
signed and stored in a repository. The use of ICT in the registries of these 
courts has provided transparency by providing the cause list, case status, 
judgments etc. in the respective web sites of the courts in India.   
   
 The Judicial process and the interaction with Stake holders 
The Judiciary depends heavily on the documents from different pillars of the 
Criminal Justice System namely the Prisons, Police, Forensic labs. In 
addition, documents issued by the Government and other agencies are relied 
upon by the Judiciary in delivering Justice to the citizens.  
 
  
While the civil cases could be filed by the advocates in the respective courts, 
the criminal cases are initiated with the police registering a FIR which is then 
sent to the Court. Receipt of FIR is acknowledged and if necessary, 
proceedings could be initiated.  The police then prepares the charge sheet and 
submits the same to the court. Traffic police also issues challans which could 
be challenged in the courts. The proceedings take place in the Court. Notices, 
summons are issued to the party through the police. Bail orders / conviction 
orders are sent to the Prisons.  In the process of hearing of civil matters, the 
details of the property and other assets are sought by the Judiciary to decide 
the matter. In some other disputes, documents issued by Government are 
sought.   
The registry in the courts also maintain and issue various documents as 
certified copies to the citizens. The accounts of all the payments received as 
fees and judicial deposits are maintained by the registry.   
4 
 
Thus there is a need for exchange of data between the different pillars of the 
criminal justice system, Government and Citizens. The need for trust between 
these systems and availability of immutable, time stamped document would 
facilitate quick delivery of Justice.   
 
Blockchain Technology 
In the traditional methods of recording transactions, the participants kept 
their own ledger/ records. There would be intermediaries like the auditors / 
regulators with whom agreements have to be made and to whom some fees 
has to be paid. There could be delay in synchronizing the ledgers. The 
duplication of efforts in maintaining multiple ledgers and vulnerability of the 
central system could cause the network to be affected.  
Blockchain is a decentralized distributed database (ledger) of immutable 
records accessed by various applications over the network.  The Blockchain 
network consists of nodes (Computer owned by the stakeholder) that are 
geographically distributed and each node maintains the same copy of the 
ledger.  
Client applications of related sectors can read or append transaction records 
to the Blockchain. Transaction records submitted to any node are validated 
and committed to the ledger database on all the nodes of Blockchain network. 
Committed transactions are immutable because each transaction is linked 
with its previous block by means of hash and signature values. Consensus 
algorithms based on voting / leader selection / lottery and distribution 
algorithms such as Gossip, multicast etc. ensure that the submitted 
transactions are transferred to all nodes and committed on all Blockchain 
nodes consistently. 
  
 
 
5 
 
 
Centre of Excellence in Blockchain Technology 
 
NIC has set up a Centre of Excellence (CoE) to overcome these challenges in 
line with MeitY’s strategy. The CoE provides a platform that Governments can 
look to for consultancy, capacity building and as an incubation center where 
the departments can develop Proof of Concepts before moving on to 
production. 
 
The CoE also helps Government departments to integrate their line-of-
business application with Blockchain by developing the smart contracts and 
APIs. The CoE is providing the Blockchain related Services and ICT 
infrastructure for the government departments to integrate their systems and 
use the BCT. 
 
The Centre has explored Blockchain protocols such as Hyper ledger Saw tooth 
and Fabric and Ethereum, and developed and deployed applications on State-
of-the-Art Infrastructure. These development frameworks have been deployed 
on Docker and Kubernetes thus enabling scalability and high availability. As 
part of the project for Unified Blockchain Framework (UBF), funded by MeitY, 
infrastructure is being created at Hyderabad, Bhubaneshwar, and Pune. 
 
Blockchain Implementations in Government  
The CoE in Blockchain Technology and developed and deployed products such 
as Certificate Chain, Property Chain, Drug Logistics System, Blockchain for 
eForensics that can be rolled out for the country. These system can also 
provide access to the Judiciary for facilitating access to authentic data thus 
reducing the time for verification of the documents and data. The details of 
these systems are provided in Annexure-I 
 
 
Use of Blockchain Technology in Judiciary 
Blockchain can democratize access to the justice system by reducing   
complexity related to availability of Trusted, Immutable, time-stamped data 
and documents. Blockchain technology can be used under the following 
scenarios for the Judiciary: 
a. 
Judicial Deposits  - Passbook in the Ledger 
Under certain circumstances, a party is ordered to deposit the money with 
the court. The registry then puts the money in fixed deposits in the banks. At 
various stages in the hearing of the cases, the court might also order that a 
portion of the judicial deposit be given to the other party. The Registry in the 
courts maintains these ledgers.  There are instances when the deposits are 
not claimed by the parties due to various reasons. Maintaining the judicial 
deposit transactions in the blockchain to ensure that it is not tampered and 
also initiating the processes of refund automatically will be another use case 
in the Judiciary.  
6 
 
 
b. 
Transfer of FIR, Charge-sheet & traffic challan data from the Police   
The FIR and charge-sheet are issued by the Police. These documents need to 
be presented to the court within a stipulated time. The details of the FIR are 
captured in the case information system in the courts and then registered as 
a case. Sometimes, even though the charge sheet is not filed, the hearings can 
be made based on the FIR.  The charge sheet is submitted by the police to the 
prosecution after validating the admissibility and then it is handed over to the 
court. The Court then acknowledges the receipt and the charge sheet is 
admitted.  
Instead, the police / traffic police department software can store the FIR, 
charge-sheet, traffic offence details & fine amount in the blockchain.  This will 
facilitate the following: 
i. 
Certified copies of the FIR / charge sheet document are also requested 
by the citizens. Storing these documents in the blockchain will facilitate the 
issue of hard copies through counters, thereby facilitating the downloading of 
soft copies by the agencies which need these documents. 
ii. The Court can refer to the FIR metadata from the blockchain for further 
processing without waiting for the hard copy of the FIR. 
iii. The fine on traffic violation can also be retrieved by the traffic court to 
dispose these cases quickly.  
E.  Publishing the notices and summons to the parties served by the Police  
The time and effort needed to issue   summons and notices to parties can be 
greatly reduced by ensuring that the registry stores these documents in the 
blockchain and enables the police staff to download these without the need to 
visit the court every day.  
f. 
Issue of bail orders by the Court 
Bail orders issued by the court are required to be presented in prisons in the 
shortest possible time.  Enabling the bail orders to be stored in Blockchain 
will facilitate in-time retrieval of the bail order document. The immutability of 
these documents ensures that the authorities at the prison and the parties 
involved can trust the digital document. 
g. 
Use of land records & Registration data  
The land records & registration data on the blockchain can be used by the 
Judiciary during the different stages in the case proceedings to check for the 
transaction details and ownership of the land or property.  
 
7 
 
h. 
Use of certificates and documents issued by Government departments 
Certificates such as marks-sheet, admission orders, caste, income, Birth, 
death certificates that are stored by the issuing authorities in the Blockchain 
can be used by the Judiciary as proof of claims. 
i. 
Forensics Reports 
The eForensics reports that are relied upon by the Judiciary can be retrieved 
from the Blockchain.  
j. 
Securing evidence  
Digital evidence stored conventionally on a CD or pen drive is more 
susceptible to data loss. The disc may be damaged or misplaced, whereas the 
data stored on a centralized system could be tampered with more easily. 
Blockchain could be used for securing evidence to be presented in court 
proceedings such as screenshots of websites, photos or any other digital or 
digitized content, and contracts without getting tampered. Uploading evidence 
to the blockchain in real-time, allows for reliable sourcing as well as storage. 
Benefits 
Implementing blockchain in Judiciary & other pillars of Criminal Justice 
System will provide the   necessary trust that each of the stakeholders require. 
Specifically, following benefits are envisaged -  
 
Maintenance of the Judicial deposits registers will ensure that no 
tampering occurs and also automate certain business tasks which would have 
otherwise be dependent on human discretion.  
 
Since the documents are available in the blockchain, the need for 
certified copies of these will be reduced to a great extent as the participating 
agencies can directly refer to the documents in the blockchain. 
 
Reduction in time taken for movement of the documents between these 
pillars can improve the efficiency of the systems. 
 
The aggrieved parties will also be able to rely on the data available on 
the blockchain thereby reducing dependencies on lawyers.  
 
Verification of facts from documents issued by other departments such 
as land records, property registration etc. will help in quicker disposals. 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Technology decisions 
From the above, it is evident that there are two types of assets that could 
probably be stored in the blockchain.  
1. Documents - Such as case files including the Judgment. These would 
be bulky and could be stored in off-chain database (Document 
Management System) with their hash in the blockchain. Whenever 
these documents are being referenced, the authenticity of the 
documents could be verified. 
 
2. Data of various departments used by the courts or sent by the courts 
to other departments. Critical parameters required for decision making 
can be stored in the Blockchain. 
 
3. Financial transactions in terms of   judicial deposits and payments to 
parties etc. is a potential candidate for which Blockchain could be 
leveraged. 
 
Solution Architecture 
Various sections of the Judiciary like Pending Branch, PS to Hon’ble Judges, 
Accounts sections would be storing data or documents into the Blockchain.  
Other stakeholders who act as consumers will be able to retrieve the 
documents. The on-boarding of the various stakeholders who would like to 
consume the data from the Judiciary Chain system or the use of API 
verification will be done by the portal. The architecture for facilitating these 
activities is given below in a pictorial form. 
 
9 
 
The process of storing the documents in the Blockchain will greatly aid as 
supplementary 
to 
the 
existing 
processes 
followed 
by 
various 
departments/offices, and organizations, etc. In computerized offices, the data 
is stored in the databases after the approval of the issuing authority. The 
existing processes will continue to work as before, except that the digitally 
signed documents will also be stored in the Blockchain by consuming APIs 
provided for the purpose.  The Judiciary Chain system will also record the 
changes made to the documents as and when there is a change in the 
document by way of judgement and all, and the end-user will be able to view 
those changes. 
Verification 
Retrieval of documents from the Blockchain can be enabled through portal 
for verification for any verifying parties or Government Departments. The 
verifying authority will be able to view the details on the portal without 
depending on a third party for verification. The history of transactions on 
the case can also be viewed.  
Alternatively, API can be used to fetch the case data and integrate with their 
applications for automatic verification.    
Using the APIs provided by the other chains like Property chain, certificate 
chain and eForensic chain the data can be fetched and viewed for the purpose 
of judgement. Thus the different chains can exchange the data based on key 
parameters for the verification purpose.  
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
Blockchain is a technology that enables the authenticated verification of the 
data. Integration with the existing Judicial system will ensure that all 
sensitive data related to the case documents are updated in Judicial Chain. 
This will control the data haking and manipulation of the data related to the 
case history.  
 
 
11 
 
Annexure – I 
 
 
 
Blockchain Solutions in Government 
 
 
1. 
e-forensics 
Online portal for the processing of forensics examination of exhibits. 
Automates the complete workflow of the forensics examination from 
registration to dispatch of reports. 
 
 
 
Registration of exhibits is done at the front desk of the FSLs and exhibits are 
assigned to concerned divisions.  
Pre-examination of the exhibits is done, and acceptance/rejection of exhibits 
is recorded in the Blockchain. 
In post-examinations observations, opinion, methods used and notes entry are 
captured. Report is prepared and the report readiness is entered in the system 
and the concerned officials stored in the Blockchain.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
Features 
• 
Registration of cases with forwarding authority and parcel details. 
• 
Pre-examination - acceptance/rejection of exhibits. 
• 
Post examination – observations, opinion, methods adopted and notes. 
• 
Report ready entry – Email and SMS alert to forwarding authority. 
• 
e-signing of reports and uploading of reports – Report sharing with 
police/court. 
• 
Despatch of reports with/without exhibits. 
• 
OTP authentication to login into eforenisics. 
• 
Dashboards to various stake holders to know the status of cases and 
pendency monitoring 
Highlights 
• 
Software can be used by CFSLs/SFSLs/RFSLs. 
• 
102 FSLs are on-boarded into eforensics software. 
• 
11.29 lakhs registrations done in eforensics portal far. 
• 
Data sharing with police and court and integration with ICJS portal. 
• 
Dashboards to various stake holders to know the status of cases and 
pendency monitoring. 
• 
E-signing of forensic report and uploading of reports. 
• 
APIs developed to share data and reports with the forwarding authority.
Impact 
• 
Registration of exhibits is made easy as FIR data is fetched from ICJS 
portal. 
• 
Status of examination and pendency monitoring. 
• 
Dashboards for various stake holders to monitor the progress of 
examinations. 
Future plan 
• 
Mobile app for e-forensics system. 
• 
Parameters capturing for the forensic examinations 
13 
 
 
2. Certificate Chain 
 
The challenges in the current system of issue and use of the certificates 
amongst the stakeholders include rampant use of fake documents for 
exploiting Government benefits, enhanced paperwork for document 
verification, delay in the process for service delivery etc.  
 
To overcome the above problems associated with paper-based documents, 
National Informatics Centre (NIC) has adopted Blockchain technology to build 
‘Certificate Chain’ for secured storage and retrieval of such records.   The main 
advantage of this   Certificate Chain system is that the Certificate can be 
accessed online by any authorised person / institution and be assured that it 
is genuine   and not tampered – all this without the need for an intermediary.  
This provides the necessary trust to the agencies which use these documents 
to ascertain the eligibility for providing benefit to the citizens.  
 
 
 
CBSE Chain has been built to record marks-sheet of Class X and XII students. 
Marks-sheet of three years totalling about 1 Crore are available in Blockchain. 
Certificate Chain for Karnataka has been established and certificates of X and 
XII from year 2012 to year 2021 have been stored in this chain. About 1.2 
Crore marks-sheet stored in the chain can be used by other agencies for 
verification. 
 
Some states are testing this in the staging environment. Certificate Chains 
are planned to be used for the admission to professional colleges, beneficiary 
schemes and recruitments in Karnataka from this year for verification of 
eligibility. 
 
 
3. Document Chain  
 
Document Chain is a single platform that provides the issuing authorities and 
consuming entities a standard procedure for storage and retrieval of any 
document issued by the government such as caste, income, ration card, 
driving license, birth & death certificates etc.   
14 
 
 
The Document Chain provides a mechanism for any agency to verify the 
details of the applicant. It could help government departments, educational 
institutions, job providers and financial institutions to get the documents 
verified without the need for a third party. 
 
Birth and Death Certificates of Planning Department-Karnataka, from April 
2022, have been getting recorded. Caste and Income Certificates of Revenue 
Department-Karnataka, from Jan 2018 are getting recorded.    These 
Certificate Chains are being used by the systems for admission to professional 
colleges in Karnataka from  the year 2022. Some states are testing this in the 
staging environment. 
 
4. Logistics Chain 
 
 
 
One of the use cases of Logistics chain is the online Supply Chain 
Management System for medicines (Aushada) of Karnataka.   The Aushada 
system is integrated with Blockchain to record the transactions related to 
movement of drugs from the manufacturer to supplier to warehouse and then 
to the hospitals including quality checks. Smart contracts provide the checks 
and balances at each stage in the supply chain and also ensure that non-
standard drugs are not moved down the supply chain.  
 
Patient can check the details of the manufacturer, expiry details & quality of 
the medicine before consumption. It provides traceability in the transactions 
(track & trace) reducing the changes of entry of spurious drugs, enhances 
precision and brings transparency. Efficient recall system can be 
implemented when the quality of the drug is found to be not-of-standard. The 
resulting integrated supply chain system brings in all stake holders to a 
common platform. This system is working since last three years. 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
5. Remote Voting Chain - PoC 
 
The remote voting system is blockchain-based distributed system developed 
to enable migrants and other in-service voters posted at different locations to 
cast their votes from   their place of work (Host Constituency) without 
commuting to their Parent constituencies, thereby saving time and money, 
and enabling higher voter turnout. A Proof of Concept (PoC) was developed as 
per the directions of Election Commission of India and demonstrated. 
 
 
 
The system enables secured storage of details of remote votes, ballots, and 
encrypted vote in the Blockchain. The   returning officer of the parent 
Constituency only would be authorised to download all encrypted votes from 
the Blockchain on the day of counting and decrypt the same to count the 
votes. 
 
 
6. Property Chain 
 
Blockchain powered property management system enables the availability of 
common ledger of the property facilitating a single source of truth. The 
property details and all the transactions on the property ( pledge, release of 
pledge, inheritence mutation, sale, gift  , acquisition initiation, allienation,  
etc) would be stored in the blockchain so that even while the process of the 
mutation is being executed in the land records system to reflect the 
transactions on the property, all the stakeholders will be able to see the 
complete history before taking decision. The prospective buyers will benefit 
greatly in ascertaining the ownership and also the rights , liabilities , details 
of GPA etc.  This will greatly reduce the litigations and speed up the disposal 
of disputes/cases.  
 
 
Register
Approve
Vote
Count
Result
16 
 
 
 
 
 
Bhoomi, e-asthi, e-swathu applications of Karnataka are   integrated with 
Property Chain for recording the agricultural and non-agricultural property 
details and transactions on them.  
 
  blockchain.gov.in  
 sio-kar@nic.in
