1
WEB3: 
	 	 	 	 A TECH 
	 	 	 	 AND 		 	
	 	 	 	 POLICY 		 	
	 	 	 	 BRIEF 
	 	 	 	 FOR 
	 	 	 	 INDIA
WEB3: 
	 	 	 	 A TECH 
	 	 	 	 AND 		 	
	 	 	 	 POLICY 		
	 	 	 	 BRIEF 
	 	 	 	 FOR 
	 	 	 	 INDIA
WEB3: 
	 	 	 	 A TECH 
	 	 	 	 AND 		 	
	 	 	 	 POLICY 		
	 	 	 	 BRIEF 
	 	 	 	 FOR 
	 	 	 	 INDIA
2
CON­
TENTS
CON­
TENTS
CON­
CON­
TENTS
TENTS
1.	
INTRODUCTION
2.	
CORE CONCEPTS
	
A. WEB3
	
B. WHAT DOES WEB3 HAVE TO DO WITH BLOCKCHAIN?
	
		
BLOCKCHAIN DEFINED
	
		
SMART CONTRACTS
	
C. WEB3 EXAMPLES
	
		
CRYPTOCURRENCY
	
		
NATIVE COINS AND TOKENS
	
		
NON-FUNGIBLE TOKENS
	
		
THE METAVERSE
	
		
DAPPS
	
		
DAOS
	
		
DEFI
	
		
SELF-SOVEREIGN IDENTITY
3.	
KEY POLICY QUESTIONS
	
A. DIGITAL OWNERSHIP AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAWS
	
B. COMMUNITY GOVERNANCE
	
C. PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION
	
D. CONSUMER PROTECTION
	
E. FINANCIAL FLOWS AND TAXATION
	
F. ONLINE GAMING
4
6
6
8
8
9
10
10
11
12
13
14
15
15
16
17
18
19
19
20
20
23
3
INTRO­
DUCTION
INTRO­
DUCTION
INTRO­
INTRO­
DUCTION
DUCTION
During the second week of November 2022, many tech enthusiasts 
found themselves bewildered at the rapidly unfolding events 
surrounding cryptocurrency exchange FTX and its now infamous 
founder, Sam Bankman-Fried. There are multiple reports of poor 
oversight of the company, improper usage of customer funds for 
a sister trading firm, ill-advised investments and exploitation of 
regulatory gaps. Whatever the effect of this public collapse of a leading 
player on the crypto industry might be, it has definitely captured the 
attention of the world and turned the spotlight towards the wider 
ambit of Web3. FTX declared bankruptcy on November 11, leaving 
many of its investors devasted over the possible evaporation of 
their funds. Hence, this episode certainly shatters the idea that the 
developments in the Web3 operate in a separate technological plane 
and do not affect regular consumers and the ‘real’ economy. This 
downfall emphasises the need to understand Web3 technologies and 
the implications of the changes ushered in by their arrival. 
4
Although the set of technologies together known as Web3 has seen 
a lot of attention in media and policy making circles in the last few 
years, the terms used and approaches adopted have varied widely. 
India has been characterised as the third largest market for Web3 in 
the world with over 450 Web3 related start-ups; regulatory activity 
has also been high, with the Reserve Bank of India making progress 
on launching the Centralised Digital Bank Currency (CBDC) and 
the Finance Bill, 2022 proposing a tax on the transfer of Virtual 
Digital Assets (VDAs), that include the growing Non-Fungible Tokens 
(NFTs), crypto-assets and other digital assets.  
Discussions on law and policy in this space have been broadly ushered 
together under the umbrella scope of tech without acknowledging the 
nuance and differences of the underlying technologies that together 
form the Web3. This primer is an attempt to connect technology and 
policy developments in the Web3 space for India. It, first, gives a brief 
overview of Web3 and its components. Then, it looks at defining 
some key examples of technologies in the paradigm. Finally, we will 
look at some of the key policy questions facing Indian regulators with 
respect to Web3.  
DISCUSSIONS ON LAW AND POLICY IN THIS SPACE HAVE BEEN BROADLY USHERED TOGETHER 
DISCUSSIONS ON LAW AND POLICY IN THIS SPACE HAVE BEEN BROADLY USHERED TOGETHER 
UNDER THE UMBRELLA SCOPE OF TECH WITHOUT ACKNOWLEDGING THE NUANCE AND 
UNDER THE UMBRELLA SCOPE OF TECH WITHOUT ACKNOWLEDGING THE NUANCE AND 
DIFFERENCES THAT THE UNDERLYING TECHNOLOGIES THAT TOGETHER FORM THE WEB3.
DIFFERENCES THAT THE UNDERLYING TECHNOLOGIES THAT TOGETHER FORM THE WEB3.
5
Web3 is a set of emerging technologies comprising blockchain, cryptographic protocols, 
digital assets, decentralised finance, NFTs, etc. The term is also used in the sense of a new 
Internet era – following on from Web2 which was characterised by centralised platforms 
and proprietary protocols, leading to so-called ‘walled gardens’. The umbrella term is 
best understood as a reference to new paradigms in the online world, that transitions 
from one set of core technologies to another gradually. 
The key principle that Web3 is built upon is decentralisation, best understood as any 
act or process of moving control from one single place to several small ones. In the 
context of the online world, it could mean many things. It could mean distributing the 
power of centralised platforms (like Amazon and Facebook) to smaller platforms. It 
could also mean moving from storing our data in a single place to storing data across 
several smaller spaces. It also could mean enabling user-to-user transactions without the 
aid of central institutions like banks. 
CORE
CON­
CEPTS
CORE
CON­
CEPTS
CORE
CORE
CON­
CON­
CEPTS
CEPTS
A. Web3
THE KEY PRINCIPLE THAT WEB3 IS BUILT UPON IS DECENTRALISATION, BEST UNDERSTOOD 
THE KEY PRINCIPLE THAT WEB3 IS BUILT UPON IS DECENTRALISATION, BEST UNDERSTOOD 
AS ANY ACT OR PROCESS OF MOVING CONTROL FROM ONE SINGLE PLACE TO SEVERAL SMALL 
AS ANY ACT OR PROCESS OF MOVING CONTROL FROM ONE SINGLE PLACE TO SEVERAL SMALL 
ONES.
ONES.
6
Web3 ushers in an era of decentralisation in many ways. It introduces underlying 
mechanisms that encourage user-to-user interactions, user control over their data and 
content monetisation, and restructuring the relationship between buyers and sellers.
A second key principle that is often discussed in connection with Web3 is the nature 
of ownership. With Web3, ownership of assets, ownership of one’s own data, and 
ownership and responsibility in organisations have the potential to majorly shift towards 
empowering users. However, as with any emerging technology, it is easy to lose ourselves 
in the utopian prospects they pose. The hype surrounding the nature of ownership 
in Web3 could be pre-emptive. But observing the differences from its predecessor - 
Web2, there are many indicators that ownership within Web3 is very different and can 
decentralise concentrated structures of hierarchy like banks and corporations. 
How is this operationalised? The primary driver for innovation in Web2 was the ability 
to persist data and solve the problem of statelessness. Web2 introduced mechanisms to 
store, analyse and interpret users’ data through cookies, local Storage objects, session 
Storage objects and similar mechanisms. This data is usually stored in a server. The 
process of storing and using users’ data also led to the emergence of social media and 
revenue potential for businesses. Aggregation of data and provision of services through 
platform ecosystems (such as Amazon, Flipkart) depict the centralised nature of Web2. 
This centralisation often results in inequitable relationships between the platforms and 
their users due to the aggregation of data within the platforms. 
Hence, the emphasis on decentralisation in Web3 is a leap from the ethos of Web2. 
The technologies that Web3 is built upon allow for storage of data on a network of 
computers instead of a single server. Data is maintained through consensus mechanisms, 
thus also reducing the reliance on a central authority for maintenance, facilitation and 
moderation. Web3, thus, persists data and also has high potential to solve the problem 
of inequitable relationships generated due to centralisation in Web2. 
One of the ways that Web3 changes the Web2 paradigm is the way its protocols are 
built. A protocol is a set of rules and processes that govern the communication between 
different computers that are in a network. There exist different kinds of devices with 
A SECOND KEY PRINCIPLE THAT IS OFTEN DISCUSSED IN CONNECTION WITH WEB3 IS THE 
A SECOND KEY PRINCIPLE THAT IS OFTEN DISCUSSED IN CONNECTION WITH WEB3 IS THE 
NATURE OF OWNERSHIP.
NATURE OF OWNERSHIP.
CORE CONCEPTS
7
different hardware and software running on them. When they exist on a network (such 
as the Internet) and need to exchange information with each other, they need standard 
processes to carry out these communications. In the networking realm, a protocol acts as a 
language - the lingua franca - between computers and other devices that are operating on 
different hardware and software1. 
Web1 operated on open protocols such as Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), Simple 
Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) and Transmission Control Protocol (TCP). The technical 
standards for the protocols were set through consolidated efforts of government agencies, 
non-profit organisations, academicians and private organisations. In the era of Web2, 
companies built closed protocols over these open protocols. Microsoft built the proprietary 
Outlook over the open SMTP protocol, which is why the user must pay to be able to use 
this email application. This contributed to the centralisation of many products because 
companies held unilateral power over network access, features, user data, etc. 
Web3 uses open protocols for most of its functions like storage, computation, and value 
exchange. With the principle of decentralisation at its core, development of Web3 protocols 
has been open and transparent. Much akin to Web1, Web3 protocols would benefit heavily 
from consolidated efforts of government agencies, academicians, non-profit organisations 
and others. 
B. What does Web3 have to do with 
Blockchain?
Blockchain Defined
A typical blockchain is a sequence of blocks that holds a list of transactions like a 
conventional public ledger. The blockchain is extended every time a new block is added 
to it after being validated by certain mechanisms. In addition to holding the transaction 
details, the block also holds the address to its previous block and a unique hash function. 
Each node is validated by other nodes and transactions would be checked. Hence, it is 
nearly impossible to tamper with data stored on the blockchain. 
The full range of impact of blockchain technology is still unclear, at this stage. But it 
1	
Communication between two nodes in a network occurs on various levels such as physical layer, data link layer, network layer, 
etc,. (depending on the model that is chosen to understand the networking). In the context of this document, we are looking at 
application layer protocols such as HTTP, FTP, SMTP, etc.
CORE CONCEPTS
8
is worth noting that blockchain has immense potential to alter institutional structures 
and economic activities. Considering the aspects that uphold market capitalism itself - 
property rights, exchange mediums, native money and law - blockchain is positioned to 
create massive impact. 
Smart Contracts
Smart contract is a key building block of Web3, but is not a well-understood term, 
possibly due to the use of the term ‘contract’. Nick Szabo introduced the idea of smart 
contracts before blockchain emerged in 2008. He intended that smart contracts utilise 
protocols and user interfaces to facilitate all steps of the contracting process. For example, 
consider the case of a person using their car to secure credit from a bank. The terms of 
the smart contract can be such that the said person can possess the ownership of the car 
as long as they make payments to the bank. Once they fail to make their payment, the 
smart contract is breached - which will initiate a protocol that transfers the ownership of 
the car to the bank. A smart contract reduces the transactional costs - such as principals, 
lawyers, third parties, etc. - that are incurred in a traditional contract.
Many applications of blockchain adopted the mechanism of smart contract. Smart 
contracts - within blockchain - are automated programs that transfer digital assets 
when a set of conditions are met. Ethereum is an example of one such blockchain 
application that uses smart contracts. The use of smart contracts alters the relationship 
between consumers. No longer are intermediaries required to establish trust between 
parties involved in a transaction. Consumers can use pre-programmed contracts with 
conditions written into the code to act as purchasing agents.
WEB3 IS BUILT ON THE PRINCIPLE OF DECENTRALISATION AND THIS PRINCIPLE IS ACHIEVED 
WEB3 IS BUILT ON THE PRINCIPLE OF DECENTRALISATION AND THIS PRINCIPLE IS ACHIEVED 
BY BUILDING UPON BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY. IN THE FOLLOWING SECTIONS, WE WILL 
BY BUILDING UPON BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY. IN THE FOLLOWING SECTIONS, WE WILL 
SEE HOW DIFFERENT APPLICATIONS AND USES OF BLOCKCHAIN INTERACT WITH CURRENT 
SEE HOW DIFFERENT APPLICATIONS AND USES OF BLOCKCHAIN INTERACT WITH CURRENT 
PARADIGMS TO FORM THE CORE TECHNOLOGIES OF WEB3. 
PARADIGMS TO FORM THE CORE TECHNOLOGIES OF WEB3. 
CORE CONCEPTS
9
For Web3 to operate, the core technologies described above have to serve certain common 
digital needs of markets and individuals in new decentralised ways – the need to transact 
financially, to assert identities in secure ways, to communicate and interact with each 
other online, and the like. This is where the following set of applications come in.
Cryptocurrency
Before we understand what cryptocurrency is, it is helpful to understand the term 
‘crypto-asset’. A crypto-asset is a form of digital asset that uses cryptography, peer-to-
peer networks, algorithms and a distributed ledger technology (such as blockchain) to 
create, verify, record and settle transactions. They operate independent of a central 
authority or a third-party for validation - which makes them trustless. 
A cryptocurrency is a type of crypto-asset. Oxford dictionary defines it as “a digital 
currency in which encryption techniques are used to regulate the generation of units of 
currency and verify the transfer of funds, operating independently of a central bank”. 
When digital currency was envisioned in its earlier days, the issue of double-spending 
arose. In the current scenario, if one spent a note of Rs. 10 to buy a cup of tea, that 
same person would not be able to spend that same note of Rs. 10 again. In the realm of 
digital currency, it had been difficult to ensure that a person did not reacquire the digital 
currency that they had just spent. This was where cryptocurrency rose as a solution to 
this problem. 
To solve the issue of double-spending, there are processes put in place on a 
cryptocurrency to verify and confirm transactions involving cryptocurrencies. Once 
these transactions are verified and confirmed, they are recorded on the blockchain 
and they become irreversible. If a person has one unit of a cryptocurrency and they 
attempt to send it to two wallet addresses, both the transactions will first go into a pool 
of unconfirmed transactions. When the first transaction is confirmed and verified, it is 
recorded onto the blockchain. After this, when the second transaction undergoes the 
C. Web3 Examples
OXFORD DICTIONARY DEFINES IT AS “A DIGITAL CURRENCY IN WHICH ENCRYPTION 
OXFORD DICTIONARY DEFINES IT AS “A DIGITAL CURRENCY IN WHICH ENCRYPTION 
TECHNIQUES ARE USED TO REGULATE THE GENERATION OF UNITS OF CURRENCY AND VERIFY 
TECHNIQUES ARE USED TO REGULATE THE GENERATION OF UNITS OF CURRENCY AND VERIFY 
THE TRANSFER OF FUNDS, OPERATING INDEPENDENTLY OF A CENTRAL BANK”. 
THE TRANSFER OF FUNDS, OPERATING INDEPENDENTLY OF A CENTRAL BANK”. 
CORE CONCEPTS
1 0
process of confirmation, it will turn out to be invalid because the considered unit of 
cryptocurrency has already been a part of a confirmed transaction. 
Therefore, cryptocurrency is envisioned as a replacement for fiat money, with the 
verification of transfers happening without the participation of any State agency. It 
is a medium of exchange and has no inherent value of its own. Bitcoin is one of the 
foremost examples of a cryptocurrency. Other examples of cryptocurrency are Ether, 
DogeCoin, Tether.
Native Coins and Tokens
Crypto assets are widely divided into two categories: native coins and crypto tokens. 
Native coins are a completely new class of electronic money that are operational on 
universally accessible peer-to-peer payment networks. For example, Ether is the native 
coin that exists on the blockchain called Ethereum. Currently, every native coin operates 
on its own blockchain network without any way to interact with other blockchain 
networks. Ether cannot interact with the Bitcoin network. This lack of interoperability 
is a major hurdle to the uptake of blockchain technology as payment systems. 
The second category of crypto assets is the crypto token. Crypto tokens act as digital 
vouchers that can be used to realise any type of asset or service. These tokens are built 
on top of native coins and hence, do not have a blockchain network of their own. These 
tokens are often programmed by a smart contract to carry out transactions after satisfying 
a set of conditions. They are therefore used for many purposes such as fundraising, 
investments, payments, shares in companies, and voting stakes in the decision-making 
process of a company. There are several standards defining the types of crypto tokens in 
existence. The following are some broad categories of tokens that are popular:
i. 	 Security tokens: A security token is an asset - such as a debt or an equity claim on 
the issuer. Therefore, they are analogous to traditional investments such as stocks, 
bonds, equities or derivatives. Blockchain Capital is one of the leading pioneers of 
security tokens. Their BCAP token is the first security token in the market.
NATIVE COINS ARE A COMPLETELY NEW CLASS OF ELECTRONIC MONEY THAT ARE OPERATIONAL 
NATIVE COINS ARE A COMPLETELY NEW CLASS OF ELECTRONIC MONEY THAT ARE OPERATIONAL 
ON UNIVERSALLY ACCESSIBLE PEER-TO-PEER PAYMENT NETWORKS. 
ON UNIVERSALLY ACCESSIBLE PEER-TO-PEER PAYMENT NETWORKS. 
CRYPTO TOKENS ACT AS DIGITAL VOUCHERS THAT CAN BE USED TO REALISE ANY TYPE OF 
CRYPTO TOKENS ACT AS DIGITAL VOUCHERS THAT CAN BE USED TO REALISE ANY TYPE OF 
ASSET OR SERVICE.
ASSET OR SERVICE.
CORE CONCEPTS
1 1
ii. 	 Utility tokens: A utility token provides a definable benefit - like access - to an 
application or a service. They serve as digital vouchers. After a utility token is 
issued to a user, the user can redeem this as a coupon at some time in the future. 
Examples of the benefits offered by utility tokens are voting rights, rewards, or 
staking governance. One of the most popular examples of a utility token is the 
Basic Attention Token (BAT) which is used in tandem with the Brave browser. Brave 
blocks ads and tracking and hence, users are rewarded with BAT if they choose to 
view non-targeted ads.  
Non-Fungible Tokens
Non-Fungible Token (NFT) is a digital asset based on the blockchain technology that 
is used to prove the authenticity of a purchase of a digital or a physical asset. The 
concept of each asset being unique and non-fungible2 differentiates the NFTs from other 
cryptocurrencies – one Bitcoin is like another but every NFT is unique. NFTs operate on 
smart contracts - which are pieces of code that are set into action if certain conditions 
are met. Hence, when these predetermined conditions are satisfied, an automated 
workflow creates the NFTs. 
NFTs do not contain the actual asset that the buyer is purchasing. They contain the 
metadata of the asset and the wallet ID of the buyer - hence acting as proof that the 
individual owns that particular asset. There is broad diversity in the application of 
NFTs. NFTs are used to sell art, fashion, assets in gaming and metaverse, real estate, etc. 
In 2021, a bundle of artwork called the Bored Ape Yacht Club (BAYC) by Yuga Labs 
sold for $24.4 million. This NFT bundle is a bunch of semi-randomly generated but 
unique cartoon-like images of apes which provides the owners of each NFT with 
exclusive benefits like merchandise drops, bonus NFTs, etc. The uniqueness of each 
ape within the bundle is what lends the artwork its non-fungible aspect. Therefore, 
NFTs conveniently pave a secure way to transfer the ownership of a possessions such 
as paintings, music and memes. It is important to note that NFTs do not transfer the 
copyrights of the artwork in consideration. 
NFTS DO NOT CONTAIN THE ACTUAL ASSET THAT THE BUYER IS PURCHASING. THEY CONTAIN 
NFTS DO NOT CONTAIN THE ACTUAL ASSET THAT THE BUYER IS PURCHASING. THEY CONTAIN 
THE METADATA OF THE ASSET AND THE WALLET ID OF THE BUYER - HENCE ACTING AS PROOF 
THE METADATA OF THE ASSET AND THE WALLET ID OF THE BUYER - HENCE ACTING AS PROOF 
THAT THE INDIVIDUAL OWNS THAT PARTICULAR ASSET. 
THAT THE INDIVIDUAL OWNS THAT PARTICULAR ASSET. 
CORE CONCEPTS
2	
A fungible asset is an asset that is easy to exchange or trade for something else of the same type and value. Following that, a non-
fungible asset is an asset that is unique and cannot be interchanged with another asset of similar type or value.
1 2
NFTs, in the fashion industry, have a broad range of applications. NFTs are used to sell 
both physical and digital objects, transferring ownership – much like how other forms of 
artwork, like paintings, are sold. A more diverse application arises out of the interaction 
of fashion with augmented and virtual reality. Accessories and clothing are designed 
to be used in the virtual world. Nike and RTFKT released the Nike Dunk Genesis 
CRYPTOKICKS NFTs that are designed to be worn in the metaverse – another 
important technology of Web3. 
NFTs in real estate introduce a new subtype called the Fractionalised-NFTs (F-NFTs) 
which allow buyers to buy a part of the NFT and share the ownership with other 
buyers. Therefore, F-NFTs are fungible. They are used to buy high-cost assets (such 
as a house) and democratise investment. Multiple buyers can buy a property and split 
the rent obtained from the rent on that property. Fractal Property is one such platform 
that enables fractionalised real estate. Therefore, we see that NFTs have a wide array of 
applications that need vastly different treatment in terms of regulation.  
The Metaverse
The metaverse is a shared virtual world where people can interact with each other like 
they do in the real world using Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR), Mixed 
Reality (MR) or Extended Reality (XR). The key concept behind metaverse is creating 
an immersive experience for people instead of just viewing in 2D on their (flat) computer 
or smartphone screen. The metaverse is not an example or an application of blockchain, 
but a technology that is enabled by blockchain technology. 
In some form, the concept of people interacting and engaging with one another in real 
time on virtual platforms has existed in video games like Roblox, Minecraft, Second 
Life, Fortnite, Animal Crossing, Pokémon Go, etc. These prototypes of metaverse are 
called Massive Multiplayer Online (MMO) video games. Second Life is a virtual world 
where you can interact with other users and also use its currency - called the Linden 
Dollar - which can be exchanged with real-world fiat money. Similarly, Minecraft is a 
sandbox game with User Generated Content (UGC). Users play within a modifiable 
3D environment by building architectures and huge structures using metre-sized blocks. 
Metaverse differs from these prototypes by providing the user with an immersive 
THE KEY CONCEPT BEHIND METAVERSE IS CREATING AN IMMERSIVE EXPERIENCE FOR PEOPLE 
THE KEY CONCEPT BEHIND METAVERSE IS CREATING AN IMMERSIVE EXPERIENCE FOR PEOPLE 
INSTEAD OF JUST VIEWING IN 2D ON THEIR (FLAT) COMPUTER OR SMARTPHONE SCREEN. 
INSTEAD OF JUST VIEWING IN 2D ON THEIR (FLAT) COMPUTER OR SMARTPHONE SCREEN. 
CORE CONCEPTS
1 3
experience. Therefore, the user is living in the virtual world instead of looking at it on a 
flat screen on their phones, tablets or computer screens. 
The metaverse is enabled by a mix of emerging technologies such as blockchain, 5G, 
Artificial Intelligence (AI), XR, digital twins3, etc. Blockchain introduces decentralised 
social systems into the metaverse. It provides a safe, secure, transparent and efficient 
way for transactions to transpire and goods be exchanged. Transactions can be traced in 
the metaverse, if built on blockchain. With the use of NFTs and Decentralised Finance 
(based on smart contracts and Fungible Tokens such as crypto assets), economic activity 
in the metaverse becomes decentralised. The tokens provide liquidity using existing 
Decentralised Exchange (DEX) solutions like Uniswap and Sushiswap. In these open 
peer-to-peer marketplaces, users can exchange their tokens without the presence of a 
centralised authority. 
Apart from providing a viable economic model to the metaverse, blockchain also enables 
safe storage of the voluminous data that is generated in the metaverse. Massive amounts 
of data are generated in creating profiles for users and recording their interactions and 
transactions with each other. Storing this data in a central storage system leads to high 
risk of data loss, tampering and corruption. Given the nature of highly sensitive and 
personal data that could be collected in the metaverse (biometric data, vocal data, vital 
signs, etc,.), the metaverse requires a secure way to store data. The decentralised and 
transparent nature of blockchain will reduce the time taken to label and cleanse data 
through collaboration among data scientists. It will also provide a reliable and safe way 
to store the voluminous data generated in the metaverse. 
DApps
Decentralised Applications are popularly stylised as DApps. DApps are trustless peer-to-
peer applications that do not operate through a centralised model, i.e, there is no single 
entity running the application, which also means that it doesn’t run as a traditional 
client-server application. 
There are several ways in which DApps embrace decentralisation in their working. First, 
while storing data, DApps can store it on the blockchain. This ensures transparency in 
the transactions because this transaction cannot be altered, deleted or withdrawn. An 
example of this decentralisation would be Cryptokitties. Users can collect, breed and 
CORE CONCEPTS
3	
Digital twin establishes a virtual twin of an object existing in the real world. Ubiquitous sensing technologies can be used to 
maintain the same state of the object as that of their corresponding twin.
1 4
trade virtual cats. These data of the cats and the ownership details are stored on the 
blockchain. Second, decentralisation can occur by providing decentralised ownership or 
authority in the application to users. These kinds of applications are called Decentralised 
Autonomous Organisations (DAOs). Let us examine this kind of DApp in the following 
section.
DAOs
Decentralised Autonomous Organisations (DAOs) are decentralised, collectively-owned 
and built on the blockchain network. They are supported primarily by smart contracts 
- which are pieces of code only triggered after certain conditions are met with. These 
smart contracts hold the rules of the organisation. They are transparent and public 
on the Internet. Thus, people can make the decision to fund the DAO solely on the 
strength of its smart contract. This process eliminates the inconvenience of forming 
business relationships with strangers. On the reception of funding, members are issued 
tradeable tokens that give them voting rights. 
Therefore, the members become stakeholders in the organisation and will have a say in 
the dealings of the organisation through whatever voting mechanism is written in the 
smart contract. The rules governed by the smart contract cannot be changed unless 
decided by a vote by its users. This means that there is no CEO or a CFO of the 
organisation who is making big decisions about the organisation. The community of 
the DAO guides the decision-making process of the organisation. There are several 
examples of DAOs in different categories of media, philanthropy, investment, etc. Some 
of the leading examples are Gitcoin, Decrypt and BitDAO.
DeFi
Decentralised Finance (DeFi) is a range of peer-to-peer financial applications that 
use the distributed ledger technology, such as blockchain and smart contracts. DeFi 
DECENTRALISED APPLICATIONS ARE POPULARLY STYLISED AS DAPPS.
DECENTRALISED APPLICATIONS ARE POPULARLY STYLISED AS DAPPS.
DECENTRALISED AUTONOMOUS ORGANISATIONS (DAOS) ARE DECENTRALISED, COLLECTIVELY-
DECENTRALISED AUTONOMOUS ORGANISATIONS (DAOS) ARE DECENTRALISED, COLLECTIVELY-
OWNED AND BUILT ON THE BLOCKCHAIN NETWORK.
OWNED AND BUILT ON THE BLOCKCHAIN NETWORK.
DEFI ENVISIONS FINANCIAL SERVICES WITHOUT THE INVOLVEMENT OF CENTRALISED 
DEFI ENVISIONS FINANCIAL SERVICES WITHOUT THE INVOLVEMENT OF CENTRALISED 
FINANCIAL ENTITIES LIKE BANKS. THESE CENTRALISED INSTITUTIONS ARE REPLACED BY 
FINANCIAL ENTITIES LIKE BANKS. THESE CENTRALISED INSTITUTIONS ARE REPLACED BY 
DEFI THROUGH WEB3 APPLICATIONS SUCH AS THE DAPPS.   
DEFI THROUGH WEB3 APPLICATIONS SUCH AS THE DAPPS.   
CORE CONCEPTS
1 5
envisions financial services without the involvement of centralised financial entities like 
banks. These centralised institutions are replaced by DeFi through Web3 applications 
such as the DApps. The functioning of the DApps is transparent and trustless because 
they are built on smart contracts that are open-source and public. 
DeFi is set to revolutionise the way financial services are disseminated throughout the 
world. Traditional financial services face many challenges such as high eligibility criteria 
for setting up of bank accounts, lack of transparency in the operations of the financial 
institutions, involvement of intermediaries, risk of breach of personal data, etc. There 
are considerably less barriers while accessing DeFi services because anyone with a 
crypto wallet and adequate funds can participate in the system. Transactions between 
users are not governed by any central authority and users are allowed to carry out 
transactions directly between each other. Aave is a DeFi platform built on the Ethereum 
network where incentives are provided to users for lending and borrowing assets in a 
decentralised manner.
Self-Sovereign Identity
In the current online world, an Internet user has many identities for the many different 
applications that they interact with. It is difficult to manage many of these jumbled 
identities. This system also provides little control to users over the data of their identities. 
The concept of Self-Sovereignty Identity (SSI) emerged in this context to provide users 
with control over their identity data. The many features of a SSI would be portability 
across multiple locations, user autonomy, user-controlled attribute disclosure based on 
user’s consent, not reliant on third parties and ability to make claims about your own 
identity. 
Blockchain technology has the properties required to realise this vision of self-sovereignty. 
It enables decentralisation and the elimination of a centralised single entity that controls 
the identities. Users can have power over their identity data and who can access it. 
Therefore, blockchain provides a good foundation for SSI to be developed on. Some 
examples of blockchain-based applications that attempt to provide self-sovereignty in 
identity are uPort, Jolocom, Sovrin and Blockcerts. 
THE CONCEPT OF SELF-SOVEREIGNTY IDENTITY (SSI) EMERGED IN THIS CONTEXT TO PROVIDE 
THE CONCEPT OF SELF-SOVEREIGNTY IDENTITY (SSI) EMERGED IN THIS CONTEXT TO PROVIDE 
USERS WITH CONTROL OVER THEIR IDENTITY DATA. 
USERS WITH CONTROL OVER THEIR IDENTITY DATA. 
CORE CONCEPTS
1 6
KEY
POLICY
QUEST-
IONS
KEY
POLICY
QUEST-
IONS
While these technologies are evolving rapidly, and descriptions of the same may look 
very different in as little as a year, regulatory bodies around the world are struggling 
to keep up with the ever-changing landscape. Web3 technologies are set to potentially 
blur nation-state borders, redefine existing organisational structures, alter transactions 
between any two individuals and reimagine the privacy of the user. These fundamental 
shifts often do not sit well within the current regulatory landscape that are based on 
certain existing assumptions and structures. In the following sections, we will delve into 
some particular and important instances of policy issues arising due to Web3. 
KEY
KEY
POLICY
POLICY
QUEST-
QUEST-
IONS
IONS
1 7
A. Digital Ownership and Intellectual 
Property Laws
Blockchain technology enables the possibility of digital timestamping the creation 
of any intellectual property - thus making it possible to trace the ownership of the 
work being sold. This process is called Blockchain-based Timestamping. For example, 
when an artist creates an original digital painting and records it on the blockchain, the 
timestamp of when that work has been created will be stored in the blockchain. Once 
this data has been recorded on the immutable blockchain, even the owner of the work 
- who is the artist, in this case - cannot change this timestamp. Therefore, Blockchain-
enabled Timestamping provides irrefutable evidence for when the original work has 
been created. 
This can also be coupled with smart contracts to trigger some compensation to the 
initial owner whenever ownership of the work changes. Hence, blockchain technology 
has the potential to reduce the reliance on notaries or intermediaries to verify ownership 
of intellectual property. It can be used to address the complex issues of intellectual 
property ownership such as patents, copyrights, trademarks, etc. At the same time, as 
the use of intelligent tools to create assets increases, new questions of ownership arise 
– who owns the AI generated art-work based on millions of physical artworks turned 
into an NFT by a third party? With the sale of an NFT, the owner of the asset does 
not transfer the copyrights to the buyer. Hence, this buyer could infringe upon the 
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) of the original artist by trying to resell the NFT and 
the original artist would not even know!
IPR becomes more complicated in the context of metaverse where there are constant 
efforts in the industry to blur the lines between the real and the virtual world. Users of 
the metaverse will create content, objects and other assets in the metaverse. Therefore, 
it also becomes important to protect the intellectual property of these users. Wider 
debates are also emerging about the use of patents in the virtual world. Is someone 
infringing upon the inventor’s patent rights if they recreate the same technology in the 
virtual world? Would the same laws as that of the real world apply in this scenario or do 
we have to reimagine how we regulate and govern IPR in the metaverse?
KEY POLICY QUESTIONS
1 8
B. Community Governance
In the era of Web2, users generated content on centralised platforms (such as Twitter 
and Instagram) and the responsibility of moderating that content fell to the centralised 
platform. The decentralised nature of Web3 allows users to own the content that they 
generate. This, hence, poses difficulties over the question of community moderation 
and compliance with legal standards around defamation, hate speech etc. For example, 
Steemit is a blockchain-based social media where users can act as content creators 
and content moderators. The website is built on the principle of community building. 
Hence, it shares its profits, not just with its financial contributors, but with its users 
who create the content. Users are rewarded with cryptocurrency payments. Users can 
upvote and downvote the content that they see on the website. The weight of a user’s 
vote depends on the reputation of their content (measured by the votes they get on 
their content) or financial contributions to the website. While this voting mechanism 
decentralises the process of content moderation, it also creates inequality between the 
users who have different powers behind their votes. Additionally, since there is no single 
authority who is responsible for removing malicious content, the problem of the same 
can get exacerbated by decentralised content moderation. 
C. Privacy and Data Protection
The boundaries of privacy have expanded beyond the confines of personal data, the 
family, the body and the home. People communicate and interact on the Internet - 
more so, now over emerging technologies such as Internet of Things and smart devices. 
Violations of privacy no longer just occur bodily and spatially, but also through intrusions 
in various spheres of life that were previously not considered private. Therefore, the 
fundamental definition of privacy has been altered in the past few years, making it 
imperative to redefine the confines of privacy legally. 
In the purview of Web3, blockchain technology is touted to be secure, and many 
decentralised privacy-first applications are emerging in the Web3 spectrum. Self-
sovereign identity allows users to assert multiple portable identities in different contexts, 
so that centralised verification of identity is not a pre-condition to transacting and 
interacting online. On the other hand, public blockchains are open for anyone to 
KEY POLICY QUESTIONS
1 9
read and write. Transactional details on the blockchain can be monitored to trace the 
ownership of that transaction to the owner - thus making it possible to identify the 
owner. Private blockchains, meanwhile, restrict the viewing and writing to an authorised 
set of participants. While private blockchains are secure, they are also less transparent 
than their public counterparts.
Outside of the blockchain ecosystem, Web3 is still accessible through existing Internet 
infrastructure such as programming languages, communication protocols and storage. 
If a user wants to access a Web3 application or service, they need to access it through a 
centralised platform - say, a website or a mobile application. Web-side access exposes the 
users to traditional privacy vulnerabilities faced by front-end access like design pitfalls, 
malicious attacks, and tracking of addresses of users accessing the platform. Thus, the 
existing privacy concerns still persist in Web3.
D. Consumer Protection
While the entry barrier for consumers to invest in crypto-assets is low, the level of 
technical knowledge and education required to understand the technologies behind 
crypto-assets is high. The most recent CoinEgg scam reportedly defrauded as much 
as Rs. 1000 crores from Indian users. Standard mechanisms for consumer grievance 
redressal have not yet developed across the range of decentralised offerings outlined 
above, particularly where exchanges or platforms themselves actively defraud thousands 
of users.  
E. Financial Flows and Taxation
The many emerging technologies in Web3 pose serious concerns over tax treatment and 
tax jurisdictions. The metaverse is a sprawling virtual world where users can interact 
with each other from any part of the world. DAOs enable the existence of collective 
ownership through governing and voting rights in organisations through tokens. The 
transactions involving crypto assets are peer-to-peer, not monitored by a centralised 
financial institution. Therefore, there are changes in the way assets are viewed in the 
Web3 paradigm. 
KEY POLICY QUESTIONS
2 0
The transactions on the metaverse raise the question of which jurisdiction can tax the 
digital assets acquired in this virtual world. Additionally, the tax treatment of crypto 
assets is a complex and evolving process that needs to adapt to the speed of adoption of 
the technologies of Web3. 
Additionally, economic activity around Web3 offerings like DApps, DAOs and NFTs 
easily lends itself to fraudulent and money-laundering activities. The metaverse is 
bustling with economic activity through crypto assets like wearables, art, collectibles, 
etc. In general, regulation for technologies in Web3 has not progressed enough to 
prevent fraud and crime. 
An example is wash trading, or the act of selling an asset to yourself or to a collaborating 
actor to drive up the prices in the market or make the asset look more voluminous than 
it is. In this scheme, the seller is on both sides of the transaction. This serves the purpose 
of misguiding the buyers about the real value and the liquidity of the crypto assets 
that they are buying. Wash trading is prevalent in the crypto markets. According to an 
Elliptic report, around 2% of all NFTs sold in the global market are wash-traded. 
Due to the limited knowledge surrounding buyers in the crypto market, the grounds 
of Web3 are also ripe for scams. Several types of scams include marketing for fake 
non-existing metaverses, phishing attacks through which NFTs and cryptocurrencies 
have already been stolen from Coinbase and OpenSea, creating bad smart contracts 
on purpose, posing as technical customer support and obtaining private keys of users’ 
wallets, delivering a subpar project after inviting early minting investment in a metaverse. 
Apart from wash-trading and scams, the metaverse also presents a good front for money 
laundering. Purchasing of ‘plots’ in the metaverse has been reported as being a front 
for laundering money obtained through illegal means. Shops in the metaverse could 
be selling perfectly legal items on the outside and could redirect customers to real-
world illegal transactions, thus leading to laundering. New kinds of financial crimes 
in the Web3 world are likely to emerge due to the dynamic and novel nature of the 
technologies. 
It is not always clear whether existing regulations designed to curb these kinds of 
activities are applicable to Web3. For example, anti-Money Laundering (AML) processes 
include all regulations or policies that ensure that institutions are not laundering illegal 
KEY POLICY QUESTIONS
2 1
money or financing terrorism. Know-Your-Customer (KYC) is a set of practices used 
by financial institutions to verify customer identity to prevent fraud, money laundering 
and terrorist financing - intentionally or unintentionally. KYC is a part of AML to 
ensure that financial institutions and customers are safe from frauds. KYC compliance 
responsibility rests with the banks. In Web3, the possibility of fraudulent transactions 
and money laundering is high, especially in the absence of centralised entities 
responsible for compliance like banks. Due to the lack of clarity on the consumer 
protection regulation surrounding the technologies in Web3, it is difficult to determine 
where, under the current circumstances, these technologies fall with respect to KYC 
and AML regulations. There is a need to comprehensively understand how KYC and 
AML regulations can be applied to DApps, DAOs, NFTs and others.
Cybersecurity is of a huge concern in the current world and will continue to be a 
concern in the upcoming era of Web3 too. Web2 cybersecurity issues like hacking, 
international cyberwarfare, corporate espionage and ransomware attacks will eventually 
find their way into the Web3 space because enterprises are investing money in there. Let 
us take a look at one such issue that is unique to Web3. Crypto-mining is the process of 
mining existing blocks on Proof-of-Work blockchain networks to validate transactions 
and add the block to the existing network. In the case of Bitcoin, miners  are rewarded 
with Bitcoin, making this activity very lucrative for them. To mine new blocks, miners 
will have to solve complex hash puzzles. They need computers, Graphics Processing 
Units (GPUs) and other specific hardware and software tools that can perform this 
computation-intensive task. Since this task requires high computational power, 
miners pool resources sometimes to divide the reward amongst themselves, if fruitful. 
The security issue arises when this pooling of resources is done illegally without the 
permission of the user of the computer. This process is called crypto-jacking. Crypto-
miners can slip mining software into someone’s computer secretly and use that device 
to harness computation power for their mining purposes. This is not just compromising 
the privacy of the user under attack here, but also the performance of their device and 
the consequent electricity bills. This is, therefore, a new form of cybersecurity issue that 
arose with Web3.  
Moving on to cybersecurity issues arising with the technology that Web3 is built 
upon, while the data on blockchain is nearly impossible to tamper with, there is still a 
possibility that data on the blockchain is mutable. Through attacks like 51% attack on 
a blockchain, attackers can corrupt the network.
KEY POLICY QUESTIONS
2 2
In a traditional enterprise, the responsibility of foreseeing, anticipating and handling 
these breaches and attacks fall to the higher management of the company which 
comprises directors and other such officers. In the United States of America, the 
directors act under the business judgement rule which provides them immunity from 
liability if they are sued on the grounds of not doing their duty of care as long as 
their actions fall under the defined rules of the judgement. The rules ensure that the 
director acted 1) in good faith, 2) with care that a reasonably prudent person would do, 
3) the best interests of the corporation. To be able to operate successfully as specified 
in these rules, the directors go through appropriate training and corporate compliance 
programs. In this context, the community-owned decentralised nature of DAOs poses 
a problem. Since the stakeholders in the decision-making process are members of the 
DAO with tokens, there is no guarantee that these members will be informed enough, 
take timely decisions and foresee the security risks that their organisation might face. 
F. Online Gaming
The Indian gaming industry is rapidly growing. Lumikai - an interactive media venture 
capital fund - released a report on the gaming industry of India in 2022. It notes that 
the Indian gaming industry is valued at $2.6 billion in FY 2022 and is expected to 
have a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 27% to reach $8.6 billion by FY 
2027. Of the 507 million gamers in India, 120 million users are paying users. In-game 
purchases are set to grow at a CAGR of 37%. The groundwork for a new era of Web3 
gaming is being laid down well. One of the most popular examples of Web3 gaming is 
a leading Play-to-Earn game called Axie Infinity, built on blockchain, in which players 
can earn Axie’s native crypto asset called Smooth Love Potion (SLP) by training and 
fighting monsters. Another way in which Web3 is infiltrating the gaming industry is also 
through in-game purchases. Ubisoft forayed into NFT gaming by introducing NFTs 
into the game Ghost Recon: Breakpoint. While there is a long way to Web3 adoption 
in the gaming world, there is great potential in uptake of Web3 technologies through 
the indirect funnel of gaming. Therefore, the gaming industry becomes an important 
domain to observe, as online gaming often serves as the earliest adopters and scalers of 
such paradigm-shifting technologies as Web3. 
Key issues arising from online gaming fall under a wide spectrum of regulatory sectors. 
KEY POLICY QUESTIONS
2 3
There are questions pertaining to existing regulatory structures such as intellectual 
property rights, gaming laws, consumer protection, privacy, etc. With the introduction 
of Web3 into the mix, issues of interoperability of identities and currencies, money 
transmission through crypto-assets and general regulation of cryptocurrencies are some 
of the immediate challenges. 
Money paid beyond the initial subscription or fee - called ‘in-game purchases’ - occur 
in the gaming world for multiple reasons. A user might want to buy skins for their 
character, unlock a new level or character of the game or buy extra lives. In-game 
purchases, in gaming history, have been used to launder money or trick the user into 
losing their money. These unintended consequences can, therefore, invoke regulations 
surrounding gaming laws and consumer protection requirements. The assets acquired 
in the game could be non-convertible or convertible to real-life fiat money. In order to 
adhere to local laws in most cases, games (like Roblox or Linden) emphasise that their 
in-game currency does not have any real-life value. 
In the Web3 era, the lack of regulation creates further questions for online gaming. 
Gaming after the advent of the blockchain technology enables the transfer of assets and 
value amongst users without borders. Users can easily transfer their assets to one another 
via a blockchain network. As interoperability between games increases, so will the value 
of these crypto-assets purchased in the game. Regulation of money transmission over 
Web3 will face newer challenges than that of the traditional online gaming world. 
Web3 gaming is also incredibly complicated because of the interaction with technologies 
like NFTs and metaverse that present difficult regulatory use-cases independently. Hence, 
the policy treatment of Web3 gaming has to differ significantly from the paradigm of 
online gaming that exists right now. 
KEY POLICY QUESTIONS
2 4
KEY POLICY QUESTIONS
This brief was authored by Srijoni Sen and Srija Gadamsetti with the support of All India Gaming Federation.
The authors would like to thank Dhruv Garg and Suman Kasana for useful comments. Any errors are the authors’ alone.
