Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Ad Hoc Networks
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/adhoc
BFL-SC: A blockchain-enabled federated learning framework, with smart
contracts, for securing social media-integrated internet of things systems
Sara Salim ∗, Nour Moustafa, Benjamin Turnbull
School of Engineering and Technology, University of New South Wales (UNSW), Northcott Dr., Campbell, 2612, ACT, Australia
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Keywords:
Federated learning
Blockchain
Smart contracts
Differential privacy
Free-riding attack
Model inversion attack
Poisoning attacks
A B S T R A C T
The integration of Social Media (SM) and the Internet of Things (IoT) is gradually transforming the activities of
SM users into valuable data streams that can be analyzed using Machine Learning (ML) algorithms. Federated
Learning (FL) has been widely employed to predict user and anomaly behaviors from distributed systems.
However, FL encounters substantial security challenges, particularly within the context of SM-integrated IoT
systems, known as SM 3.0 systems. These challenges encompass issues of accountability and vulnerabilities that
render them susceptible to various cyberattacks, including single-point-of-failure, free-riding, model inversion,
and poisoning attacks. We propose a Blockchain-enabled FL with Smart Contracts (SC) (BFL-SC) framework. To
coordinate the learning process, track participants’ contributions and reward the participants transparently, an
SC-based FL is constructed as an incentive mechanism that combats free-riding attacks and enables automated
and auditable rewarding of the participants. Also, to conceal the original data points and mitigate the impact of
model inversion attacks, a Differentially Privacy-based Perturbation (DPP) mechanism is proposed. To address
potential poisoning attacks, a thorough verification protocol is suggested. The experimental results obtained
from two datasets, namely SM 3.0 and Human Activity Recognition (HAR), show that the BFL-SC framework
can achieve high utility with a precision of 96.95% over the SM 3.0 dataset and 90.14% over the HAR dataset
while adhering to privacy and efficiency standards, compared with compelling techniques.
1. Introduction
Web 3.0 signifies the third generation of web technologies, char-
acterized by the integration of decentralization and agility into web
applications [1,2]. In the context of this evolution, the integration
of Social Media (SM) with the Internet of Things (IoT), known as
SM 3.0, brings about enhanced connectivity, interaction, and seamless
movement across physical spaces [3]. However, this integration also
amplifies the potential of cyberattacks and privacy breaches in such
data-rich environments, leading to potential financial, political, and
social damages [4]. As many applications in such environments use
Machine Learning (ML) techniques that for training often require large
amounts of data collected from the IoT, data privacy is a critical
issue [5]. Therefore, approaches that maintain the utility of such valu-
able data while protecting individuals’ privacy are required. Federated
Learning (FL)-based Privacy Preservation (PP) is one such approach [6].
According to [7], the average cost of a data breach in Australia in
2023 was $3.35 million, an increase of 9.8% over that of the previous
year. This is approximately $2 million less than the global average for
2020 of $5.39 million. Due to the rise of big data, ML, and Artificial
Intelligence (AI), there has also been greater emphasis placed on data
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail address: s.salim@unsw.edu.au (S. Salim).
privacy and security. At the same time, governments are strengthening
data security and PP through new legislation, such as the European
Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [4].
FL [3] expands the scale of training data while protecting partic-
ipants’ data privacy by periodically exchanging updates at a specific
frequency (i.e., communication rounds) between local and global mod-
els rather than instantaneously exchanging raw data. It evolved as a PP
technique as well as a new category of distributed ML models, relevant
to a large number of domains that contain sensitive data [8]. However,
despite its distributed collaborative learning architecture, protected by
PP safeguards, private information can be illegally inferred from its
exchanges of models’ updates. At the same time, the sharing of models
and the high numbers of training iterations and communication rounds
can be exploited by hackers and curious parties for various purposes,
such as manipulating a learning model’s output and gaining access to
sensitive data [4,8].
Research Challenges– In the context of FL, several potential re-
search challenges emerge, as demonstrated by recent work [9,10].
These challenges encompass various aspects that need to be addressed
for the secure and efficient operation of the learning framework. These
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2025.103760
Received 17 September 2024; Received in revised form 18 December 2024; Accepted 7 January 2025
Ad Hoc Networks 169 (2025) 103760 
Available online 14 January 2025 
1570-8705/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 
 S. Salim et al.
challenges include:
Model Poisoning Attacks: A significant challenge in FL arises from
the potential for participants to upload model updates that, whether
intentionally or unintentionally, degrade the quality and performance
of the global model. Malicious participants may manipulate their local
training datasets or tamper with the model updates before sending
them to the central server for aggregation, resulting in a phenomenon
known as model poisoning [4]. These adversarial manipulations can
severely compromise the integrity of the global model, often causing
it to make incorrect predictions or behave unpredictably. To mitigate
the risk of such attacks, it is essential to implement robust verification
procedures that ensure the authenticity and quality of model updates.
Incentive mechanisms – systems designed to reward participants based
on the quality and usefulness of their contributions – are fundamental
for deterring such attacks. By providing participants with sufficient
motivation to behave honestly, these mechanisms can prevent adver-
saries from taking advantage of the system to undermine the learning
process. Without adequate incentives, malicious actors may find op-
portunities to inject harmful updates into the model without facing
any consequences, thereby undermining the effectiveness of the FL
system [11].
Model inversion attacks: Another significant challenge arises from
the potential leakage of sensitive information embedded in local train-
ing data, which can be inferred from the shared model updates [12].
Attackers may leverage inference techniques, such as gradient inversion
or model inversion, to indirectly extract confidential details about the
local datasets. For example, attackers can reconstruct class represen-
tatives or individual data points by analyzing the model parameters,
including gradients, weights, or activations, which are shared during
the aggregation process [4]. This indirect extraction of sensitive in-
formation constitutes an inference attack [13], where attackers gain
access to private data without direct access to the local training data.
To mitigate this risk, privacy-preserving techniques, such as Differential
Privacy (DP) [14], can be applied to perturb the model updates, making
it computationally infeasible to extract meaningful information and
ensuring that even if they are intercepted, the confidential data remains
protected.
Free-Riding Attacks: In FL, where participants contribute com-
putational resources and data to the collaborative training process
without receiving direct financial compensation, the issue of free-riding
becomes a serious concern [4]. Free-riding participants may choose to
contribute little or nothing while still benefiting from the improvements
made to the global model. This behavior can distort the learning pro-
cess, as the global model may be trained on incomplete or suboptimal
data, which, in turn, impacts its accuracy and overall performance.
Furthermore, free-riders reduce the incentive for other participants to
contribute meaningfully, potentially leading to a decrease in overall
system efficiency. To mitigate free-riding attacks, it is crucial to de-
sign and implement effective incentive mechanisms that encourage
participants to make valuable contributions. These mechanisms may
include rewarding participants based on the quality and relevance of
their updates or employing reputation systems that track participants’
contributions over time. Such strategies ensure that all participants
are motivated to engage actively, which enhances the reliability and
efficiency of the FL framework.
To protect against such attacks, recent approaches propose using
blockchain as a mechanism for sharing and validating local mod-
els [15–17]. Blockchain is a distributed ledger technology that records
transactions in a series of blocks linked chronologically, ensuring data
integrity and transparency [18]. By leveraging blockchain, participants
can ensure the transparency and integrity of model updates shared
during the FL process. However, despite the enhanced security pro-
vided by blockchain, challenges persist, such as the potential lack
of active contribution from local participants in a consortium-trusted
environment [11,19]. Participants may opt to remain passive or provide
minimal contributions, which can undermine the collaborative nature
of the learning process. Furthermore, the risk of malicious participants
uploading poisoned local models to compromise the global model’s
accuracy remains a concern [13].
In light of these complexities, it is imperative to explore compre-
hensive approaches that combine the benefits of blockchain technology
with additional security measures to enhance the resilience and trust-
worthiness of FL systems. By addressing the aforementioned challenges
and developing robust mechanisms to incentivize active participation,
detect and mitigate attacks, and ensure PP, we can pave the way for
more secure and reliable FL frameworks.
Contribution– This study seeks to explore the actual potential of
FL-based PP techniques in the domain of SM-integrated IoT. It aims to
address critical vulnerabilities in the FL paradigm, paving the way for
more robust FL environments with enhanced PP guarantees. To accom-
plish this, a novel strategy is proposed to mitigate the aforementioned
vulnerabilities and attacks. Firstly, a unique and transparent Smart
Contracts (SC) architecture is leveraged on a blockchain to construct an
SC-based FL framework. Through this SC-based FL framework, we es-
tablish coordination for the learning process while ensuring transparent
tracking of participants’ contributions.
This architecture provides a novel scalar incentive mechanism,
which serves as a powerful deterrent against free-riding attacks. Fur-
thermore, it enables automated and auditable rewarding of partici-
pants, thereby fostering accountability and recognizing the quality of
their contributions. In addition to the SC-based architecture, we harness
the power of DP and develop a cutting-edge DP-based data-level Per-
turbation (DPP) mechanism. This mechanism specifically targets model
inversion attacks in a conventional FL environment, significantly en-
hancing PP. By perturbing original data points and training the global
model locally using these perturbed data, the DPP mechanism substan-
tially reduces the impact of model inversion attacks. The contributions
of this paper can be summarized as follows:
• Design and implementation of framework: We propose a com-
prehensive Blockchain-enabled Federated Learning with Smart
Contracts (BFL-SC) framework that addresses the limitations of
centralized FL systems. This framework offers participants a de-
centralized, transparent, and secure environment for privacy-
preserving execution. By leveraging the blockchain architecture
integrated with SC, the BFL-SC framework ensures mutual trust
and accountability among all FL participants, facilitating collab-
orative learning without relying on a central authority.
• Resistance to model inversion attacks: The BFL-SC framework
incorporates a cutting-edge DPP mechanism, enabling partici-
pants to perform decentralized PP operations on their datasets.
This mechanism effectively mitigates the risk of model inversion
attacks within the FL scenario by preventing adversaries from
extracting sensitive information from the local models. As a re-
sult, the DPP mechanism ensures the confidentiality of individual
participants’ data while maintaining the integrity of the global
model.
• Demonstrating imperviousness to poisoning attacks: In the BFL-SC
framework, the traditional central authority in FL is replaced by
a novel SC-based system, which introduces a robust verification
protocol for local models. This decentralized approach signifi-
cantly reduces the risk of poisoning attacks, as each model update
undergoes thorough validation before being incorporated into
the global model. As a result, the PP of the FL environment is
strengthened, ensuring the integrity of the learning process.
• SC-based incentive mechanism: A novel incentive mechanism is
designed and implemented within the SC to prevent free-riding
attacks and encourage active participation from all participants.
This mechanism automates the reward distribution process, en-
suring that rewards are allocated based on each participant’s
actual contribution to the learning process. By making the re-
ward system transparent, auditable, and autonomous, the BFL-SC
Ad Hoc Networks 169 (2025) 103760 
2 
 S. Salim et al.
framework not only motivates participants to contribute effec-
tively but also helps build trust in the model’s reliability. Par-
ticipants are rewarded fairly and proportionally to the quality of
their contributions, ensuring continued engagement and fostering
a collaborative environment.
Research Outline– The structure of this paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 provides the background and reviews the existing related
work. In Section 3, we present a novel BFL-SC framework. The exper-
imental results derived from our framework are detailed in Section 4,
shedding light on the empirical findings and outcomes. Finally, in
Section 5, we conclude the paper.
2. Background and related works
In this section, we provide an introduction to the fundamental
concepts of FL and SC-based frameworks. We then review the related
work, highlighting the evolution and lineage of existing frameworks,
and discuss the gap that motivates the development of the proposed
BFL-SC framework. This section aims to set the stage for understanding
both the theoretical foundations and the practical needs that underpin
our approach.
2.1. Federated learning
Consider a generic FL framework that involves a single server and 𝑁
participants. Each participant, denoted as 𝑃𝑖, holds a local dataset 𝐷𝑖,
where 𝑖∈ 1, 2, … , 𝑁. The objective at the server is to train a global
model 𝑀𝐺using the data distributed across the 𝑁participants. We
can describe the size of the training datasets as |𝐷| = ∑𝑁
𝑖=1 |𝐷𝑖|, with
𝑄𝑖=
|𝐷𝑖|
|𝐷|
≥0 and ∑𝑁
𝑖=1 𝑄𝑖= 1 representing the proportions of the
datasets.
Typically, the local training datasets of participants consist of input–
output pairs, denoted as (𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖), where the input vector 𝑥𝑖∈R𝑑has 𝑑
features, and the corresponding labeled output 𝑦𝑖∈R. In the learning
setting, the objective is to learn the model parameter vector (R𝑑)
that characterizes the output 𝑦𝑖using a loss function 𝐿𝑖(𝑀), such as
𝐿𝑖(𝑀) =
1
2(𝑥𝑇
𝑖𝑀−𝑦𝑖). The aim is to aggregate the training vectors
𝑥𝑖(representing the SM and IoT data) at the central server using the
following aggregation equation:
𝑀𝐺=
𝑁
∑
𝑖=1
𝑄𝑖𝑀𝑖
(1)
where 𝑀𝐺represents the resulting global model, and 𝑀𝑖denotes the
updates of the local model trained on the dataset of the 𝑖th participant.
Consequently, FL aims to learn the global model through parameter
aggregation, considering the constraints of local dataset storage and
processing by the participants. This can be formulated as a federated
optimization problem:
𝑀𝐺= ar gmin
𝑁
∑
𝑖=1
𝑄𝑖𝐿𝑖(𝑀 , 𝐷𝑖)
(2)
where 𝐿𝑖(.) represents the loss function of the local model of the 𝑖th par-
ticipant. The solution to this optimization problem’s objective function
will converge to the global optimal model after a predefined number
of communication rounds, involving local training and exchange of
training results between the server and participants.
2.2. Smart contracts
SC is a fundamental technology that underpins blockchain. In
essence, SCs can be defined as ‘‘a set of digitally specified promises
and agreements that contract parties can fulfill’’ [20]. In the context
of blockchain, SCs serve as programmable contracts, leveraging the
decentralized, transparent, and immutable nature of blockchain. The
Fig. 1. Poisoning attacks in FL framework.
Fig. 2. Model inversion attacks in FL framework.
integration of SC technology with blockchain provides an ideal environ-
ment for automating the execution of FL. The entire learning process
within the FL system can be effectively traced back and executed
through SCs.
By leveraging blockchain technology, SCs offer cost-effectiveness
and eliminate the possibility of hostile behavior interfering with con-
tract execution. When an SC is digitally written into the blockchain, the
properties of the blockchain ensure the maintenance, deployment, and
execution of its parameters. This enables the traceability, transparency,
and immutability of the entire learning process. The decentralized
nature of blockchain ensures that SCs are executed in a distributed
manner, without the need for a centralized authority, enhancing the
security and reliability of FL systems.
2.3. Attack principles in federated learning
FL-based environments are susceptible to various attacks, including
poisoning [8], model inversion [3], and free-riding attacks [4], which
undermine performance, privacy, and efficiency.
Poisoning attacks [8] (shown in Fig. 1) aim to degrade the global
model by introducing malicious updates. These can occur through data
poisoning, where local data is manipulated, or model poisoning, where
gradients are altered before being shared. Model poisoning is typically
more effective due to its direct influence on the aggregated global
model.
Model inversion attacks [3] (shown in Fig. 2) focus on reconstruct-
ing sensitive training data from shared model updates. Adversaries
achieve this by collecting gradients, training an attack model to reverse
the updates, and recovering the raw data, posing severe privacy risks.
Free-riding attacks [4] involve participants who abstain from con-
tributing meaningful updates but still benefit from the global model.
Such behavior disrupts fairness and efficiency in the learning process,
especially in resource-constrained settings.
Ad Hoc Networks 169 (2025) 103760 
3 
 S. Salim et al.
These attacks highlight the critical need for robust security measures
in FL.
2.4. Related work
Several studies have focused on enhancing the security and privacy
of IoT and SM networks through the integration of FL, blockchain,
and DP. Despite these advancements, challenges related to inference
attacks and accountability in FL systems remain unresolved [13]. FL
is vulnerable to model inversion attacks, where adversaries attempt
to infer sensitive data from model updates [4,8,12]. The centralized
nature of FL introduces concerns regarding accountability, making the
system susceptible to issues such as poisoning attacks and free-riding
behavior among participants [4,8,21]. To address these issues, several
works have proposed solutions based on blockchain technology due to
its inherent immutability and transparency.
For instance, [13,18] leverage blockchain to offer incentives to
participants and track the quality of local model updates, ensuring
a more trustworthy FL process. Similarly, [22] proposes the use of
blockchain to enable any internet-empowered device to contribute
to a global privacy-preserving data-sharing network. However, these
approaches introduce the challenge of model leakage due to the in-
volvement of third parties, known as miners in the blockchain, which
may compromise privacy.
Further advancements have been made to tackle security vulnera-
bilities in FL systems. Zhao et al. [15] introduced an FL scheme that
integrates a reputation mechanism along with DP, enabling manufac-
turers to train ML models while respecting the privacy of participants’
data. In industrial IoT, Jia et al. [16] proposed a blockchain-enabled FL
application model that improves security. Passerat et al. [17] extended
the use of blockchain in FL to facilitate the secure sharing of electronic
health data among hospitals. These solutions highlight the utility of
blockchain in enhancing FL security but still face challenges in ensur-
ing strong privacy guarantees, especially in data-intensive applications
such as healthcare.
In the medical domain, [11] presented a blockchain-based FL archi-
tecture combining blockchain with SCs, designed to ensure the security
and privacy of medical data shared across healthcare institutions. While
these works contribute to the security of FL, the privacy of sensitive
data remains a critical concern, particularly in contexts that require
intensive data sharing for performance improvement.
Other works have focused on the role of encryption and trust
mechanisms within FL. For example, [23] proposed a multi-attribute
trust metric to evaluate participants in FL environments. However,
this model lacks robust privacy integration, which is essential for
maintaining data confidentiality and utility in FL systems. Another
approach by [24] introduced a cross-modal search framework utilizing
homomorphic encryption to secure data in FL. While this provides
high security, it introduces significant computational overhead. On
the other hand, [25] discussed a compressed-sensing FL model that
focuses on communication efficiency but sacrifices accuracy when high
compression rates are applied.
In addition to these, the application of incentive mechanisms to
FL has been explored in various studies. For instance, [26] introduced
ADFL, which utilizes proof mechanisms to defend against poisoning at-
tacks. This approach, while effective in ensuring data integrity, does not
provide the same level of participant incentivization as other models,
leaving room for improvement in participant engagement and trust.
Recent advancements have led to the development of frameworks
that integrate advanced privacy techniques such as DP, along with
reputation-based incentive systems. These methods aim to enhance the
reliability and resilience of FL-based systems, offering new avenues for
improving privacy-preserving and trust-enhancing FL models. Despite
significant progress, challenges such as balancing privacy and utility,
maintaining high model accuracy, and ensuring robust participant
engagement continue to be central concerns for FL-based systems [13].
Motivated by these studies, our proposed BFL-SC framework intro-
duces a novel decentralized DPP mechanism to address these chal-
lenges, achieving high accuracy, resilience, and privacy across dis-
tributed systems while also enhancing participant engagement through
an innovative reputation-based incentive model.
3. BFL-SC framework design and implementation
In this section, we first present an overview of the BFL-SC frame-
work (hereinafter referred to as BFL-SC) and then its implementation.
3.1. Overview of the proposed framework
To facilitate a better understanding of the BFL-SC framework, we
provide an overview of its functioning as illustrated in Fig. 3. Further-
more, to coordinate a learning task between its initiator and partici-
pants, it is assumed that there are four entities/roles, namely, (i) an
SC-based administrator who deploys SCs on the blockchain, (ii) task
initiators who launch a request to construct a learning model, that is,
FL tasks with rewards, (iii) training participants who locally train FL
global models to gain rewards and (iv) miners who validate/quantify
the participants’ contributions. Table 1 provides a detailed depiction of
these entities and their respective roles within the BFL-SC framework.
As illustrated in Fig. 3, with an initial global model and sufficient
deposit to reward contributing entities, a task initiator adds an FL task
to an SC-based system. Participants willing to cooperate in the learning
process but do not want to reveal their data join and are allocated
particular tasks as either training participants or miners. Each training
participant initially collects a specified amount of data that is being per-
turbed using a data-level perturbation mechanism to protect its privacy
against any potential attack, as explained in Section 3.2.5. Then the SC-
based administrator creates an SC as a genesis block of the blockchain’s
distributed ledger that encapsulates the task’s requirements as well as
a test dataset provided by the task initiator. Meanwhile, the SC triggers
the related functions to execute the learning task.
In the first round of a task’s execution, a training participant re-
trieves its initialized global model (𝑀0
𝐺), updates it with the perturbed
version of its local data (𝐷′
𝑖) and uploads the training results (local
updates) to the associated miners. The miners then evaluate all the
uploaded models to quantify the training participants’ contributions
based on the levels of classification accuracy of their uploaded models.
These models are then used to generate the current round’s global
one. The training participants in the second round receive the previous
round’s global model, train it on their data and upload their local
models’ updates. In each round, rewards are offered to both the training
participants and miners depending on their quantifiable contributions
to the FL task. These steps are continued until 𝑅rounds are reached.
3.2. BFL-SC framework implementation
In this section, the minimum functionalities deployed in the SC
to enable the workflow stated in the previous section to occur are
outlined. The entire process of the proposed framework is composed of
eight phases: (1) initialization; (2) task initiation and deposit-holding;
(3) task and SC deployment; (4) local model updating; (5) verifica-
tion of model and quantifications of contributions; (6) global model
aggregation; (7) block generation and validation; and (8) incentive
allocation. A diagram of the sequence of the BFL-SC’s learning process
is depicted in Fig. 4.
With the implementation of the blockchain, in addition to the task
initiator and SC-based administrator, the BFL-SC is co-designed by a
set of participants (𝐸= 𝑒1, … , 𝑒𝐴) willing to work on the task over a
sequence of rounds (𝑅). In each round, each participant (𝑒) is assigned
to one of the following key roles: training participants (𝑃= 𝑃1, … , 𝑃𝑁)
and miners (𝑆= 𝑠1, … , 𝑠𝐽), where 𝑁+ 𝐽= 𝐴.
Ad Hoc Networks 169 (2025) 103760 
4 
 S. Salim et al.
Fig. 3. Overview of BFL-SC framework.
Table 1
Descriptions of entities’ roles.
Entity
Role
Input
Output
Task Initiator
Launches a request to construct an FL task
Aggregated global model
as a task response
All task specifications with the initial global
model, test dataset, and deposit enough for
rewarding the contributed entities.
SC-based
Administrator
Deploys SC on the blockchain, registers the
federation entities, holds the deposits for
accountability, assigns roles for learning process,
appends the transaction’s block to the distributed
ledger, and rewards the contributing entities based
on an incentive mechanism.
Validated block, all task
specifications,
requirements, and
thresholds
Rewards to the miners and training participants,
global model to the task initiator as a task’s
response.
Training
Participant
Collects the data for local training, applies the
DPP mechanism to perturb the local dataset,
locally trains the pre-given global model on the
perturbed dataset, and uploads its local model
updates to the miners.
Task specifications,
initial/previous round’s
global model
Local model updates.
Miner
Validates the uploaded local model, quantifies the
participants’ contributions, broadcasts and
aggregates qualified ones, mines and
cross-validates round’s block.
Local models’ updates,
testing dataset
Aggregated global model, contribution quality
measurements for the uploaded model, approval
from the majority of round’s block.
3.2.1. Initialization phase
This phase begins before the learning process. In it, all the federa-
tion entities, including the task initiator and participants, must register,
approve and sign the terms and conditions of the SC-based system.
Without the loss of generality, this system is designed to register each
federation entity by identifying its (i) address and (ii) Boolean value
that indicates whether it is registered as a task initiator or partici-
pant. Once registered, the task initiator can launch the tasks and the
participants can begin them.
3.2.2. Task initiation and deposit-holding
To launch an FL task, a task initiator must provide (i) its specifi-
cations, for example, the metadata required to conduct it, the partic-
ipants, the baseline model (𝑀0
𝐺) and parameters of the model to be
trained, (ii) other parameters and thresholds (e.g., the global model’s
level of accuracy and the total number of communication rounds)
and the privacy budget (the privacy parameters are 𝜖and 𝛿) and (iii)
deposits for rewards.
Once a launched task is authorized by the SC-based administrator,
the deposits are held for accountability. The task initiator then deter-
mines which of the task’s specifications will be made public to the
community of participants. Once stated, the task is deployed to the
registered participants. Interested entities, functioning as auctioneers,
may submit formal bids with their capabilities, dataset details, training
expenses and deposits to participate in the task. It should be noted
that, in order to maintain accountability, each participant needs to
stake a deposit in the SC-based system and all bids are recorded on
the blockchain to avoid any potential tampering or attacks such as a
51% one.
A 51% attack is an attack on a PoW blockchain whereby an attacker
or group of malicious entities acquires control of 51% or more of the
network’s mining rate or computing power [27]. In it, the attackers are
able to prevent qualified participants from winning confirmations and
rewards. They can also switch transactions that were terminated while
they possess the network, indicating that they could double-spend re-
wards. Then, the SC-based administrator chooses the participants who
provided the most value (e.g., higher capability and lower cost) as the
winners. The administrator assigns the miner’s role to the participants
Ad Hoc Networks 169 (2025) 103760 
5 
 S. Salim et al.
Fig. 4. The sequence diagram of the proposed BFL-SC framework.
with the highest capabilities and that of a training participant to those
with lower capabilities to jointly accomplish the FL task. Participants
who lose the bidding can retrieve their deposits through the SC-based
system while those of the winners are immediately repaid if the results
of the learning task are later proven to be reliable. Also, the SC-based
administrator establishes the mechanism for awarding each winner.
3.2.3. Task and smart contracts deployment
Once the learning task’s roles of the bid’s winner participants are
assigned by the SC-based administrator according to their bids and
capabilities. Details of the task with the rewards mechanism as well
as the aggregation and block-mining rules are deployed in an initial SC
which is then signed and approved by the whole task’s entities before
the actual task-handling is begun.
3.2.4. Local model updating
In this framework, a scenario in which numbers of SM and IoT data
participants are connected with an SC-based administrator is exhibited.
As depicted in Fig. 3, each participant is responsible for conducting
local training based on the data it gathers and the global model it
receives as broadcast by the administrator. Only the local models’
updates are exchanged not any local training dataset. Once evaluated,
the miners calculate the average of the qualified models and update
the global model with it. As the miners are assumed to be honest-
but-curious participants. With the injected DP noise, the miners or
adversaries will not be able to retrieve users’ private data by reversing
their uploaded updates. Therefore, a DPP mechanism for FL to develop
an effective DPP-based FL framework is proposed.
At the training participant level, each participant (𝑃𝑖) stores its own
local dataset (𝐷𝑖) which is gathered from two main heterogeneous data
sources, that is, SM platforms and IoT devices for smart homes. A 𝐷𝑖
comes with a 𝑃𝑖’s SM data, with several observations recorded and ex-
changed between a 𝑃𝑖and its IoT devices. Typically, such raw datasets
may consist of missing or irrelevant data that should be cleaned and
filtered to improve the learning model’s classification accuracy. For this
purpose, data pre-processing steps are used.
Firstly, to deal with incomplete data values in the SM and IoT
dataset, an imputation technique consistent with that outlined in [4] is
used. In it, missing values are replaced with statistical measures, such as
feature vector means and medians, or static ones such as zeroes. In our
study, missing values are replaced with zeroes to ensure that the data is
not skewed toward central data points. Secondly, as the 𝐷𝑖is comprised
of more than only numeric data from two heterogeneous data sources, a
feature extraction technique is applied. Its purpose is to filter the 𝐷𝑖and
remove irrelevant features as well as the labeling process that depends
on the creation of an authentic ground-truth tabular which includes
real class labels for the 𝑃𝑖. This enables an evaluation of the learning
model’s performances before and after applying the proposed DPP to
ensure data privacy and utility. Finally, since the 𝐷𝑖has different types
of features, including both categoric and numeric values, the data pre-
processing sequence outlined in [4] is applied to the local data before
conducting data perturbation to provide the first level of data privacy
to the 𝑃𝑖’s data.
3.2.5. Data perturbation using DPP mechanism
As outlined in Algorithm 27 (lines 2–10), our DPP is applied to
the processed data produced from the previous step to provide the
second level of data privacy to the 𝐷𝑖of this 𝑃𝑖. In it, for every data
vector, taking vector 𝑥𝑖1 as an example, the following procedures are
undertaken.
Firstly, 2𝑛different vectors of the same class label (𝑦𝑖1) as the base
vector (𝑥𝑖1), where 0 < 𝑛≤𝑇∕2 and 𝑇is the total number of vectors
with a class label equal to 𝑦𝑖1, are randomly selected. Selecting these
vectors from the same class label group produces a new perturbed
vector with more indications and features relative to that class label
which, in turn, enhance utility in terms of prediction accuracy.
Ad Hoc Networks 169 (2025) 103760 
6 
 S. Salim et al.
Algorithm 1: BFL-SC framework with proposed DPP
Input: 𝑅, 𝑀0
𝐺, 𝜖, and 𝛿(privacy budget), 𝑅(number of rounds),
𝛥𝐹(global sensitivity), and 𝑛(number of scaled
difference vectors)
Output: 𝑀𝑅
𝐺
1 Initialization: 𝑟= 1 and 𝑀𝑟−1
𝑖
= 𝑀0
𝐺∀𝑖∈𝑃;
2 Local Training Dataset Perturbation:
3 while 𝑃𝑖∈ {𝑃1, 𝑃2, … , 𝑃𝑁} where 𝑁≤𝐴do
4
– ∀𝑥𝑖∈𝐷𝑖∈𝑘with class label 𝑦𝑖1;
5
– Randomly select 2𝑛different vectors of the same label;
6
– Calculate 𝜎𝑖value as in Equation (5);
7
– Generate Gaussian distributed random noise () with a
mean of zero and standard deviation of 𝜎2
𝑖;
8
– Add Gaussian noise to 𝑛scaled difference vectors
according to Equation (3);
9 end
10 Return: 𝐷′
𝑖;
11 while 𝑟≤𝑅do
12
Local training:
13
while 𝑃𝑖∈ {𝑃1, 𝑃2, … , 𝑃𝑁} where 𝑁≤𝐴do
14
– Train 𝑀𝑟−1
𝑖
on 𝐷
′
𝑖to generate 𝑀𝑟
𝑖as per Equation (6);
15
– Calculate model updates as per Equation (7);
16
end
17
Return: ∇𝑀𝑟
𝑖;
18
Global aggregating:
19
– Update 𝑀𝑟
𝐺using Equation (8);
20
– Broadcast the global model ∀𝑖∈𝑃;
21
Local verifying:
22
while 𝑃𝑖∈ {𝑃1, 𝑃2, … , 𝑃𝑁} do
23
– Test (𝑀𝑟
𝐺) using the local dataset (𝐷
′
𝑖∈𝑁);
24
end
25
𝑟= 𝑟+ 1;
26 end
27 Return: 𝑀𝑅
𝐺;
Secondly, 𝑛scaled difference vectors are added to the base vector
as
𝑥′
𝑖1 = 𝑥𝑖1 + (0, 𝜎2
𝑖)(|𝑥𝑖2 −𝑥𝑖3| + ⋯+ |𝑥𝑖2𝑛−1 −𝑥𝑖2𝑛|)
(3)
where 𝑖1 ≠𝑖2 ≠𝑖3 and 𝑦𝑖1 = 𝑦𝑖2 = 𝑦𝑖3. 𝑥′
𝑖1 represents the perturbed vector
of the 𝑦𝑖1 vector, 𝑖the index of the participant, 𝑖1, 𝑖2, 𝑖3 ∈ {1, 2, … , |𝐷𝑖|}
random integers that stand for the index of the vector in the 𝐷𝑖and 
a randomized scaling factor obtained for each index as a realization of
a Gaussian-distributed random noise with a mean of zero and standard
deviation of 𝜎𝑖that satisfies the (𝜖, 𝛿)-DP properties and aligns to
conceal the global sensitivity (𝛥𝐹) of the 𝐷𝑖.
In this regard, the global sensitivity (𝛥𝐹) of function 𝐹is repre-
sented as
𝛥𝐹= 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝐷𝑖,𝐷′
𝑖‖𝐹(𝐷𝑖) −𝐹(𝐷′
𝑖)‖1
= 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝐷𝑖,𝐷′
𝑖∥
1
|𝐷𝑖|
|𝐷𝑖|
∑
𝑗=1
ar gmin
𝑀
𝐿𝑖(𝑀 , 𝐷𝑖[𝑗])
−1
|𝐷′
𝑖|
|𝐷′
𝑖|
∑
𝑗=1
ar gmin
𝑀
𝐿𝑖(𝑀 , 𝐷′
𝑖[𝑗]) ∥1= 2𝜗
|𝐷𝑖|
(4)
where 𝐷′
𝑖is a neighboring dataset of the 𝐷𝑖with the same size but
differing in only one sample and 𝐷′
𝑖[𝑗] the 𝑗th training sample in the
𝐷′
𝑖. According to the aforementioned results, the optimal requirement
for achieving a low level of global sensitivity is that all participants
contribute with sufficient local datasets. Therefore, to ensure (𝜖, 𝛿)-
DP [13] for each participant in the FL framework, the noise scale is
set and denoted by the Gaussian noise () [13] with a mean of zero
and standard deviation of 𝜎2
𝑖as
𝜎𝑖= 𝜗× 𝛥𝐹
𝜖
(5)
where 𝜖is a small, positive number that curates the trade-off between
the utility and privacy levels, (𝜗), which is equal to
√
2𝑙 𝑜𝑔1.25
𝛿
that is
a clipping threshold for bounding the local model and 𝛿the possibility
that 𝜖-DP can be broken with a probability of 𝛿.
3.2.6. Local training
Given a perturbed local set (𝐷′
𝑖) of a training dataset (𝐷𝑖) and an
FL training task, the 𝑖th participant in a group (𝑃) of 𝑁participants to
which the learning task is assigned, locally trains the previous round’s
global model on its perturbed local dataset which leads the objective
function to be
𝐿𝑖(𝑀) =
1
|𝐷′
𝑖|
∑
𝑗∈𝐷′
𝑖
ar gmin
𝑀
𝐿𝑖(𝑀 , 𝐷′
𝑖)
(6)
with 𝐿𝑖(𝑀) in this setting as the loss function of the local model of the
𝑖th participant when trained on the perturbed dataset (𝐷′
𝑖). Then, the
𝑖th participant calculates the update (∇𝑀𝑖) of its local model as per
Eq. (7) and sends it back to the associated miner.
∇𝑀𝑟
𝑖= 𝑀𝑟
𝑖−𝑀𝑟−1
𝑖
(7)
where 𝑟indicates the current communication round and 𝑟∈𝑅.
3.2.7. Verification of models and quantifications of contributions
After receiving the local models’ updates, each miner uses the
testing dataset to evaluate the quality of those of its associated training
participants according to the evaluation thresholds defined in the SC.
The SC-based system may use the merits of this evaluation step to
properly eliminate any faulty/poisoned local models’ updates from
unreliable training participants as well as quantify the contributions of
the qualified ones and reward them accordingly.
This verification step aims to exclude those considerably poisoned
𝑀𝑟
𝑖uploaded by compromised training participants using fake data
or noisy models to adversely affect the global model’s accuracy. In
particular, to evaluate 𝑀𝑟
𝑖, each miner is directed to use a unified
testing dataset to train the local models’ updates it receives. Also, the
accuracy of the classification for evaluating the quality of the uploaded
models is leveraged. Therefore, the accuracy of each 𝑀𝑟
𝑖is evaluated
by a miner (𝑠) and specified as 𝐿𝑠(𝑀𝑟
𝑖), with the lower the 𝐿𝑠(𝑀𝑟
𝑖), the
higher the accuracy of 𝑀𝑟
𝑖.
After comparing the 𝐿𝑠(𝑀𝑟
𝑖) of model 𝑀𝑟
𝑖against the 𝐿𝑠(𝑀𝑟−1
𝐺)
of previous 𝑅𝑟−1’s global model based on the tolerance threshold, the
miner can decide whether to broadcast this local model for considera-
tion in the round’s global model as a qualified one or exclude it as being
a poisoned trained local one. Finally, if certified as a qualified model
by more than 𝐽∕2 miners, which means that more than ℎof the miners
reach the same truthfulness of the model, 𝑀𝑟
𝑖is used to aggregate the
global model.
3.2.8. Global model aggregation
Each miner, in this phase, aggregates the average weight of the
qualified local models with that of the previous round’s global model
(𝑀𝑟−1
𝐺) and generates a new global model (𝑀𝑟
𝐺) according to
𝑀𝑟
𝐺= 𝑀𝑟−1
𝐺
+ 1
𝑁
𝑁
∑
𝑖=0
∇𝑀𝑟
𝑖
(8)
This FedAvg [28] aggregation of qualified models is triggered if enough
training participants upload local models in a timely manner, other-
wise, this round is abandoned.
Ad Hoc Networks 169 (2025) 103760 
7 
 S. Salim et al.
3.2.9. Block generation and validation
Once a round’s global model is formulated, each miner commences
the mining process until either the requisite nonce is found or it
receives a block produced by another miner. When one miner generates
a new block, other miners cross-validate its contents (e.g., the nonce,
evaluations of the training participants contributions, local models’
updates and aggregated global model). Denoting that 𝑠𝑖is the miner
who reaches the nonce first, its candidate block is identified as the
round’s block and broadcast to all the miners for cross-validation.
3.2.10. Incentive allocation
The last function in this SC-based FL workflow is to distribute
rewards. When a round’s block is generated and authenticated by the
round’s miners, the SC-based system creates an SC containing partici-
pant incentives and signs it with its own signature. In particular, firstly,
each participant validates the newly aggregated global model and
confirms that its quantified contribution is estimated accurately and
that its transaction details are valid. If this is the case, the participant
signs the deployed SC with its signature and returns it to the SC-based
system. Once the signed SC is received, the participant is compensated
in accordance with the incentive rules specified in the SC and the
round’s block is added to the blockchain’s distributed ledger.
In practice, for the SC-based system, an incentive mechanism is
designed and implemented to deter a free-riding attack and reward
participants properly. To achieve this goal, an SC-based administrator,
inspired by the incentive mechanism, compensates participants accord-
ing to their responsibilities for/contributions to the learning task. Let 𝜌
denote a unit reward.
1. Participant rewards: Participant 𝑃𝑖is rewarded proportionally to
the quality of its locally trained 𝑀𝑟
𝑖in 𝑅𝑟, denoted as 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑟
𝑖, if the
𝑀𝑟
𝑖is evaluated as a qualified model. Therefore, the total reward
for 𝑃𝑖in a 𝑅𝑟is calculated based on the error from the best local
model in the 𝑅𝑟as
𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑟
𝑖= 𝜌×
1
|𝐿(𝑀𝑟
𝑖) −𝐿(𝑀𝑟
𝑚)| + 1
(9)
2. Miner rewards: Miner 𝑠in a 𝑅𝑟is rewarded for evaluating the
quality of the uploaded local models as well as the generated
block and its total rewards calculated as
𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑟
𝑠= 𝜌×
𝑇𝑟
𝑠
𝑇𝑟
𝑄
+ 1
𝐽
(10)
3. Block generator’s reward: A block’s generator in a 𝑅𝑟is rewarded
for generating a round’s block only if the loss function of the
newly aggregated model is less than that of the previous round’s
global one ((𝐿(𝑀𝑟
𝐺) < 𝐿(𝑀𝑟−1
𝐺))) with its reward calculated as
𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑟
𝑙= 𝜌× (𝐿(𝑀𝑟−1
𝐺) −𝐿(𝑀𝑟
𝐺))
(11)
The reward-distribution and task-handling phases continue to loop
until the training process is completed and round 𝑅is reached, at which
point the SC-based administrator can submit the final global model
(𝑀𝑅
𝐺) to the task initiator.
4. Experimental results and analyses
To validate the effectiveness of our designed BFL-SC, we conduct
experiments on the newly designed SM 3.0 dataset [1] as well as the
Human Activity Recognition (HAR) one [29] which has wider com-
munity acceptance. These two datasets are chosen as the SM 3.0 one
provides a unique and emerging context and the HAR one highlights
a wider contextual usage and, therefore, enables broader comparisons
within the community.
For comparison purposes, two classifications (learning) tasks are
conducted. The first is to classify the preferences of SM users in the
SM 3.0 dataset and the second is a HAR pattern recognition one for
identifying the actions carried out by a person given a set of observa-
tions of him/herself and the surrounding environment in the dataset.
For a comprehensive comparison, these two tasks are conducted using
the BFL-SC, standard FL, and a centralized learning model. This setup
allows us to comprehensively assess our framework’s performance in
both privacy-preserving and non-privacy settings, as well as compare
it with traditional centralized approaches.
4.1. Experimental setting
FL settings: In this framework, a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) [30]
is trained on the SM 3.0 dataset and a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) [31] one on the HAR dataset. In this architecture, the task
initiator is in charge of establishing these models’ parameters. A specific
set of parameters, such as the number of hidden layers, activation
functions, and output layers, are used to assess a model’s performance
in these experiments. In particular, the MLP contains 50 nodes in a
single hidden layer, a rectified linear activation function (ReLu), and an
output layer (a SoftMax activation) modified based on the loss function
used. Three convolutional and three pooling layers as well as a fully
connected one make up the CNN’s architecture. The kernel sizes of each
convolutional and pooling layer are 7, 3, and 1, respectively, while the
depth of the convolution is 64 steps, the stride size is 3 and the batch
size is 64. In the fully connected layer, there are 512 hidden units. The
models are used by each participant, with five local training epochs per
r and a learning rate of 𝜂= 0.01.
Parameter settings: In the experiments, the total number of rounds
(𝑅) is set to 100 and the number of participants (𝐴) to 20, with the
samples of each participant |𝐷𝑖| assigned with a randomly sharded
equal portion of the entire SM 3.0/HAR training set. The mining time
per block = 10 with 𝜂= 0.01 the default and the unit reward (𝜌) is
set to 1 in all the BFL-SC experiments. With the aforementioned basic
configuration, the following are the specific experimental setups:
1. A centralized MLP/CNN which is a centralized learning ap-
proach whereby the training data involved is centrally gathered
to train the MLP/CNN model;
2. A standard FL without a PP model, or blockchain as used in [32];
3. FL with 3 of 20 participants malicious, where these participants
exhibit mixed malicious behaviors. Specifically, two participants
perform poisoning attacks by injecting harmful gradients into
the training process over the course of 10 epochs, deliberately
updating their local models with incorrect gradient information
to degrade the overall model performance. The third participant
acts as a free-rider, abstaining from performing any meaningful
training or sharing irrelevant updates. This mixed attack sce-
nario simulates a more realistic adversarial environment and
demonstrates the framework’s robustness in handling diverse
malicious activities within the FL ecosystem;
4. BFL-SC with all 20 participants legitimate; and
5. BFL-SC with 3 of 20 participants malicious, i.e., a malicious ratio
of 3/20. In this case, the malicious participants perform both
poisoning attacks over a period of 10 epochs and free-riding
attacks by abstaining from contributing updates. These attacks
are countered by the decentralized verification and consensus
mechanisms within the BFL-SC framework.
For development purposes, an Ethereum blockchain is built on the
back end using the Truffle suite (Ganache and the Truffle Development
Environment) [33]. Also, the MLP, CNN, and FedAvg [28] are devel-
oped using the Python programming language. All the experiments are
executed on a PC with an i7 processor and 16 GB memory.
Ad Hoc Networks 169 (2025) 103760 
8 
 S. Salim et al.
Fig. 5. Evaluation of BFL-SC framework using SM 3.0 dataset.
Fig. 6. Evaluation of BFL-SC framework using HAR dataset.
4.2. Comparative evaluation
In Figs. 5 and 6, the effectiveness of the proposed framework is
illustrated. There are three runs across 100 communication rounds for
each of the four experiments depicted in the images and the accuracy of
the global model generated by all 20 participants is recorded at the end
of each round. Over the period of 100 rounds, a random combination
of 16 𝑁and 4 𝐽is assigned manually to each of the two BFL-SC
executions, with the average level of accuracy of each round of the
three executions shown.
The blue lines in Figs. 5 and 6 represent the levels of accuracy of
the standard FL experiments and the orange ones of the BFL-SC ones.
When all 𝑁participants are valid network participants, every uploaded
local model (𝑀𝑖) is used to construct the global one (𝑀𝐺). As the first
two setups for the FL and BFL-SC experiments on both datasets do
not involve any malicious participant, orange curves are observed very
close to the red lines in Figs. 5 and 6. This indicates that the FL portion
of the BFL-SC is operating correctly. Furthermore, although the BFL-SC
has fewer learning participants (𝑁) than the FL (12 vs 20), its accuracy
is not compromised due to the participants’ roles being re-scheduled in
each round by the SC-based administrator. The yellow and gray lines
depict the levels of accuracy of the BFL-SC and FL with 3 malicious
participants, respectively.
In comparison with the standard FL with three malicious entities,
verification of the BFL-SC model efficiently excludes the local model’s
updates being poisoned by these malicious entities while maintaining
overall levels of accuracy comparable to those of the standard FL
and BFL-SC experiments (blue and orange lines). However, following
convergence, the gaps between the orange/blue lines and yellow ones
are approximately 12% to 15%. This is due to the fact that up to 15% of
the training data held by the 3 malicious participants is not adequately
trained.
To measure the performances of the trained models, apart from
measurements of their accuracy levels depicted in Figs. 5 and 6, the
Table 2
Evaluation metrics.
Metric
Equation
Precision
𝑇 𝑃
𝑇 𝑃+ 𝐹 𝑃
(12)
Recall rate
𝑇 𝑃
𝑇 𝑃+ 𝐹 𝑁
(13)
f1-score
𝑇 𝑃
𝑇 𝑃+ 1
2 (𝐹 𝑃+ 𝐹 𝑁)
(14)
Table 3
Precision, recall and f1-score comparisons of SM 3.0 and HAR datasets’ global models.
Metric
Precision (%)
Recall (%)
f1-score (%)
Model/Dataset
SM 3.0
HAR
SM 3.0
HAR
SM 3.0
HAR
centralized MLP/CNN
99.18
93.21
99.57
92.82
99.37
93.01
FL
98.03
91.35
98.30
91.06
98.21
91.20
BFL-SC
96.95
90.14
97.01
90.11
96.98
90.12
BFL-SC with 3 malicious
79.46
75.62
82.34
76.04
80.87
75.83
FL with 3 malicious
46.36
37.35
78.51
39.05
58.29
38.18
Fig. 7. Evaluation of BFL-SC framework with different privacy levels.
standard metrics in the literature of precision, recall rate, and f1-score
are applied, with their results presented in Table 3. Also, True Positive
(TP), False Positive (FP), True Negative (TN), and False-negative (FN)
are four terms used to describe them, as shown in Table 2.
As shown in Table 3, the proposed BFL-SC achieves considerable
performances in the applied learning models (MLP and CNN), with a
precision of 96.95% for the SM 3.0 dataset and 90.14% for the HAR one
compared with those of the centralized learning models and standard
FL. In comparison with the standard FL with 3 malicious entities,
although the BFL-SC has approximately the same number of malicious
entities, it enables an average improved user preference recognition
in the SM 3.0 dataset 33.1%, and accurate activity recognition in the
HAR dataset with an improvement of 38.27%. Therefore, the learning
models work well with the maintained local updates protected by the
DPP in the BFL-SC experiments, as can be seen from the trends for both
datasets.
4.3. Evaluation of BFL-SC framework with different privacy levels
According to the concept of data-based privacy [4], the PP capabil-
ities of the proposed DPP mechanism in the BFL-SC are examined from
the following perspectives, with an emphasis on the role of blockchain
in ensuring privacy:
Data privacy:
The proposed mechanism is developed based on
the DP principle, with a distributed privacy-preserving architecture as
its core concept. Blockchain plays a crucial role in this process by
providing a secure and transparent ledger for tracking the updates
of local models. By using blockchain, participants’ model updates are
securely recorded and time-stamped, ensuring the integrity and trans-
parency of the updates. Explicitly, this DPP-based framework enables
precise classification by aggregating local models’ updates learned on
Ad Hoc Networks 169 (2025) 103760 
9 
 S. Salim et al.
Fig. 8. Accumulated rewards for BFL-SC with all 20 legitimate participants.
perturbed datasets instead of the original data. This method preserves
the privacy of sensitive information, as the data used for learning is
obfuscated through the DP mechanism. Blockchain further strengthens
data privacy by ensuring that the data cannot be tampered with or
accessed by unauthorized parties, enhancing the trustworthiness of the
entire process.
Data utility: This relates to approximating the evaluation metrics,
such as accuracy, precision, and recall, implied in comparisons of re-
sults. The experimental findings show that the DPP-based framework is
comparable to the standard FL model in terms of performance. The lat-
ter is a decentralized ML model that aggregates a significant number of
raw updates to provide a high level of utility. However, in the context of
privacy-preserving FL, the aggregation is done over privacy-protected
updates, ensuring that the raw data remains confidential. As shown
in Section 4.2, the proposed framework provides comparable results
to standard FL under the privacy-preserving constraint, demonstrating
its superiority. Additionally, the integration of blockchain allows for
the tracking of data flows, ensuring that participants can verify the
legitimacy of model updates without directly accessing the underlying
data. As illustrated in Fig. 7, there is also a trade-off between data
utility and data privacy, where a higher level of privacy protection
typically results in slightly reduced model performance, but this loss is
mitigated by the enhanced security and trust provided by blockchain.
In Fig. 7, the experimental results obtained from the BFL-SC on the
SM 3.0 dataset with different noise variances are depicted. The blue
line represents the experiment with 𝜖= 10 and 𝛿= 10−5, and the green
line represents the identical experiment except with 𝜖= 6. It is clear
that, at a low privacy level (high 𝜖and small 𝜎), the DPP mechanism
significantly improves learning efficiency and model accuracy. This
is reasonable because, as the variance of the injected Gaussian noise
decreases, so does the learning performance. Blockchain ensures that
even when privacy is preserved, the integrity of the learning process
and the authenticity of the model updates are maintained.
4.4. Evaluation of the incentive mechanism
In this section, the influence of the incentive mechanism on partic-
ipants’ rewards and reputations is analyzed. It is possible to compare
the incentives a participant can obtain at the end of the communication
rounds by running two experiments on the SM 3.0 dataset. In the first,
our proposed incentive mechanism is used and all the participants
are believed to be legitimate entities. In the second, this mechanism
is applied again but with the premise that 3 of 20 participants are
malicious.
The reward lines accumulated by all 20 participants in the experi-
ments are depicted in Figs. 8 and 9. It is observed that the rewards held
by malicious participants in the second one grow exceedingly slowly
and no longer increase in an early round (Fig. 9) due to the incentive
mechanism.
Fig. 9. Accumulated rewards for BFL-SC with 3 malicious participants.
Table 4
Accuracy, Precision and Recall comparisons.
Metric
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
Framework/Dataset
SM 3.0
HAR
SM 3.0
HAR
SM 3.0
HAR
DPP based BFL-SC
95.07
89.45
96.95
90.14
97.01
90.11
DP-based BFL-SC
79.03
74.16
79.45
75.36
83.28
79.74
4.5. Evaluation of the DPP mechanism
This section examines the efficacy of the proposed DPP mechanism
through the analysis of two experiments conducted on the SM 3.0
and HAR datasets. The first experiment utilizes our proposed DPP
mechanism, while the second experiment replaces this mechanism with
the standard DP mechanism. The experimental results are summarized
in Table 4, which presents comparisons of accuracy, precision, and
recall metrics.
Analyzing the table, we observe that the DPP-based BFL-SC frame-
work achieves higher accuracy, precision, and recall scores compared to
the DP-based BFL-SC framework in both datasets. These results clearly
demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed DPP mechanism
compared to the standard DP mechanism, indicating its effectiveness in
the given context.
4.6. Interpretability of FL features
The features relevant to our FL-based framework using the SM 3.0
dataset are presented in this section. Model interpretation is critical
for any ML-based framework to be employed in industrial applications
and networks, especially from regulatory and legal standpoints [13].
Therefore, the SHAP explainability method, which visualizes the value
of an input feature that contributes to a learning model’s predic-
tion/classification performance, is applied as an explainability scoring
method for our framework’s learning model. To identify the importance
of each feature, SHAP leverages Shapley values to test basic models
with multiple combinations of features [34]. The Shapley value is the
average marginal contribution of a particular feature to all potential
feature combinations. It specifies a one-of-a-kind payout scheme that
fulfills the requirements outlined for the concept of data value [35].
Therefore, it is increasingly being used in centralized learning to value
the training data and maintain the long-term involvement of highly
relevant features.
The average of the feature significance derived using the BFL-SC
learning model for each participant locally using their test data is
depicted in Fig. 10. The summary dot plots demonstrate that the global
tendency in terms of the relevance of features among all participants
is the same and, furthermore, 𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑓is the most relevant feature
among all participants. The second most relevant features of SM users
Ad Hoc Networks 169 (2025) 103760 
10 
 S. Salim et al.
Fig. 10.
Significance of the features for our FL-based framework using the SM 3.0 dataset and SHAP values (averages of the features’ significance ((a) and (b)); marginal influences
of one or two features on learning model ((c)); how SHAP values of each feature change model’s output from prior to final predictions given the relevance of all features ((d)).
Fig. 11. Individual SHAP value plots for local interpretability of (a) single and (b) multiple observations.
in the SM 3.0 dataset are 𝑑 𝑜𝑏𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟and personality traits which is rea-
sonable considering that both variables typically impact an individual’s
preferences. Also, in Fig. 10(b), a summary bar plot that presents the
most important features in descending order is shown. The top features
contribute more to the model than the bottom ones which results in
significant prediction performances.
The Partial Dependence Plot (PDP) shown in Fig. 10(c) depicts
the marginal influences of one or two features on a learning model’s
predicted result. It determines if the target and a feature have a linear,
monotonic, or complex relationship. In Fig. 10(d), a waterfall plot that
illustrates how the SHAP values of each feature change the model’s
output from the prior prediction under the data distribution to its
final prediction given the relevance of all the features is depicted.
The features are ordered according to the levels of intensity of their
SHAP values, with the lowest gathered together at the bottom of the
plot when the number of features in the model reaches the maximum
display limit. Also, individual SHAP value plots for local interpretability
are shown in Fig. 11 for single and multiple observations, respectively,
Ad Hoc Networks 169 (2025) 103760 
11 
 S. Salim et al.
which demonstrate how these values can be calculated in individual
situations. Features that push the prediction rightward and leftward are
represented in red and blue, respectively.
4.7. Comparative analysis of BFL-SC with existing privacy and trust
schemes
The proposed BFL-SC framework, employing a DPP mechanism,
addresses key limitations in current FL models by achieving high accu-
racy, resilience, and privacy across distributed systems [36]. In contrast
to existing methods, BFL-SC uniquely combines advanced DP with a
reputation-based incentive mechanism to ensure both PP and robust
participant engagement. Comparative studies in FL privacy and trust
were selected based on their leading privacy mechanisms or unique
approaches to trust evaluation, making them suitable benchmarks for
assessing BFL-SC’s combined privacy, efficiency, and resilience.
For instance, the trust evaluation model in [23] was chosen for
its multi-attribute trust metric, a pioneering approach to trust in FL.
However, it lacks the robust privacy integration found in BFL-SC, which
supports variable privacy levels. BFL-SC achieves high data utility
even under stringent privacy parameters (e.g., at 𝜖= 10, accuracy
reaches 95.07% on the SM 3.0 dataset, comparable to traditional FL
models without privacy constraints). As shown in Figure 4.5, BFL-SC
demonstrates an effective balance between data utility and privacy, a
feature not fully supported by this model.
The cross-modal search framework in [24], selected for its use of
homomorphic encryption, highlights a high-security approach within
FL, though at a computationally intensive cost. BFL-SC overcomes this
by employing distributed DP, maintaining privacy with lower overhead
while sustaining model accuracy and precision across datasets (accu-
racy: 95.07% on SM 3.0, 89.45% on HAR). Moreover, BFL-SC preserves
data utility, achieving superior precision and recall metrics of 96.95%
and 97.01% (SM 3.0 dataset), surpassing traditional DP approaches that
suffer accuracy drops (e.g., 79.03% on SM 3.0).
The compressed-sensing FL model in [25] was included for its com-
munication efficiency, albeit with accuracy loss at high compression
rates. BFL-SC, instead, applies DP-based perturbation without compres-
sion, maintaining high-fidelity model updates. Lastly, ADFL of [26],
recognized for its defense against poisoning attacks through proof
mechanisms, lacks BFL-SC’s incentive-based deterrent, which rewards
legitimate contributions while discouraging malicious activity. Figs. 8
and 9 illustrate how BFL-SC’s incentive mechanism effectively curtails
malicious participants, with their rewards stagnating early in training.
Overall, BFL-SC outperforms across multiple benchmarks ( Table 4),
offering superior accuracy, privacy utility, and participant trust, es-
tablishing itself as a robust solution for privacy-preserving, resilient
FL.
5. Conclusion and future work
An architectural design of a framework in which an FL learning
task is regulated by an SC operating on a blockchain network has
been proposed. It leverages the advantage of the SC to validate partici-
pants’ contributions, construct the global model, and track participants’
performances to enable incentive mechanisms while preserving the
privacy of the participant’s data. More specifically, to promote trust-
worthiness in the proposed FL framework, the SC is employed to track
each participant’s contributions and performance. This development of
an FL framework with the proposed DPP mechanism could preserve
participants’ private data from being reconstructed by any adversarial
inversion attacks. Furthermore, by having miners conduct their veri-
fication protocol, a higher level of transparency is obtained which is
particularly significant in our setting as the output of this verification
step is used to estimate incentives. Finally, recognizing the detrimental
impact that free-riding attacks might have, particularly in a small FL
setting, the BFL-SC’s incentive mechanism is designed to dissuade them
and appropriately reward participants for persuading more participants
to contribute to the learning process. In the future, we intend to conduct
further experiments and put our framework to the test with real-world
home appliance datasets. Furthermore, to improve accuracy, we will
seek out the deterministically optimal harmony for model parameters
and thresholds.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Sara Salim: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation,
Methodology, Conceptualization. Nour Moustafa: Writing – review &
editing, Supervision, Conceptualization. Benjamin Turnbull: Writing
– review & editing, Supervision.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
I have added the link of the used data.
References
[1] Sara Salim, Benjamin Turnbull, Nour Moustafa, Data analytics of social media
3.0: Privacy protection perspectives for integrating social media and internet of
things (SM-IoT) systems, Ad Hoc Netw. 128 (2022) 102786, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.adhoc.2022.102786.
[2] Wenwen Ding, Jiachen Hou, Juanjuan Li, Chao Guo, Jirong Qin, Robert Kozma,
Fei-Yue Wang, Desci based on Web3 and DAO: A comprehensive overview and
reference model, IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst. 9 (5) (2022) 1563–1573.
[3] Sara Salim, Nour Moustafa, Benjamin Turnbull, Imran Razzak, Perturbation-
enabled deep federated learning for preserving internet of things-based social
networks, ACM Trans. Multimed. Comput. Commun. Appl. (TOMM) 18 (2s)
(2022) 1–19.
[4] Lingjuan Lyu, Han Yu, Xingjun Ma, Chen Chen, Lichao Sun, Jun Zhao, Qiang
Yang, Philip S. Yu, Privacy and robustness in federated learning: Attacks and
defenses, IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. (2022) 1–21.
[5] Haiming Wang, Zhikun Zhang, Tianhao Wang, Shibo He, Michael Backes,
Jiming Chen, Yang Zhang, PrivTrace: Differentially private trajectory synthesis
by adaptive Markov model, in: USENIX Security Symposium 2023, 2023.
[6] Fan Lai, Xiangfeng Zhu, Harsha V Madhyastha, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Oort: Effi-
cient federated learning via guided participant selection, in: USENIX Symposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, 2021, pp. 19–35.
[7] 13 critical data breach stats for Australian businesses — upguard, 2023,
https://www.upguard.com/blog/australian-data-breach-stats, 
(Accessed 
on
20/05/2023).
[8] Minghong Fang, Xiaoyu Cao, Jinyuan Jia, Neil Zhenqiang Gong, Local model
poisoning attacks to byzantine-robust federated learning, in: Proceedings of the
29th USENIX Conference on Security Symposium, 2020, pp. 1623–1640.
[9] Timothy Stevens, Christian Skalka, Christelle Vincent, John Ring, Samuel Clark,
Joseph Near, Efficient differentially private secure aggregation for federated
learning via hardness of learning with errors, in: 31st USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security 22), 2022, pp. 1379–1395.
[10] Bimal Ghimire, Danda B. Rawat, Recent advances on federated learning for
cybersecurity and cybersecurity for federated learning for internet of things, IEEE
Internet Things J. 9 (11) (2022) 8229–8249.
[11] Zhilin Wang, Qin Hu, Ruinian Li, Minghui Xu, Zehui Xiong, Incentive mechanism
design for joint resource allocation in blockchain-based federated learning, IEEE
Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. 34 (5) (2023) 1536–1547.
[12] Kang Wei, Jun Li, Ming Ding, Chuan Ma, Howard H. Yang, Farhad Farokhi,
Shi Jin, Tony Q.S. Quek, H. Vincent Poor, Federated learning with differential
privacy: Algorithms and performance analysis, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur.
15 (2020) 3454–3469.
[13] Sara Salim, Benjamin Turnbull, Nour Moustafa, A blockchain-enabled explain-
able federated learning for securing internet-of-things-based social media 3.0
networks, IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst. (2021) 1–17.
[14] Sara Salim, Ismail Ali, Sondoss Elsawah, A secure simulation-optimisation
framework for fleet mix problem: A defence-based real-world application, in: Pro-
ceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion,
2024, pp. 207–210.
Ad Hoc Networks 169 (2025) 103760 
12 
 S. Salim et al.
[15] Yang Zhao, Jun Zhao, Linshan Jiang, Rui Tan, Dusit Niyato, Zengxiang Li,
Lingjuan Lyu, Yingbo Liu, Privacy-preserving blockchain-based federated learning
for IoT devices, IEEE Internet Things J. 8 (3) (2021) 1817–1829.
[16] Bin Jia, Xiaosong Zhang, Jiewen Liu, Yang Zhang, Ke Huang, Yongquan Liang,
Blockchain-enabled federated learning data protection aggregation scheme with
differential privacy and homomorphic encryption in iIoT, IEEE Trans. Ind.
Inform. 18 (6) (2022) 4049–4058.
[17] Jonathan Passerat-Palmbach, Tyler Farnan, Mike McCoy, Justin D. Harris, Sean T.
Manion, Heather Leigh Flannery, Bill Gleim, Blockchain-orchestrated machine
learning for privacy preserving federated learning in electronic health data,
in: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain), 2020, pp.
550–555.
[18] Dinh C Nguyen, Ming Ding, Quoc-Viet Pham, Pubudu N Pathirana, Long Bao
Le, Aruna Seneviratne, Jun Li, Dusit Niyato, H Vincent Poor, Federated learning
meets blockchain in edge computing: Opportunities and challenges, IEEE Internet
Things J. 8 (16) (2021) 12806–12825.
[19] Tong Wu, Weijie Wang, Chuan Zhang, Weiting Zhang, Liehuang Zhu, Keke Gai,
Haotian Wang, Blockchain-based anonymous data sharing with accountability for
internet of things, IEEE Internet Things J. 10 (6) (2023) 5461–5475.
[20] Dominic Deuber, Bernardo Magri, Sri Aravinda Krishnan Thyagarajan, Redactable
blockchain in the permissionless setting, in: 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy (SP), IEEE, 2019, pp. 124–138.
[21] Sin Kit Lo, Yue Liu, Qinghua Lu, Chen Wang, Xiwei Xu, Hye-Young Paik,
Liming Zhu, Toward trustworthy AI: Blockchain-based architecture design for
accountability and fairness of federated learning systems, IEEE Internet Things
J. 10 (4) (2023) 3276–3284.
[22] Collin Meese, Hang Chen, Syed Ali Asif, Wanxin Li, Chien-Chung Shen, Mark
Nejad, BFRT: Blockchained federated learning for real-time traffic flow predic-
tion, in: 2022 22nd IEEE International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Internet
Computing (CCGrid), 2022, pp. 317–326.
[23] Jingjing Guo, Zhiquan Liu, Siyi Tian, Feiran Huang, Jiaxing Li, Xinghua Li,
Kostromitin Konstantin Igorevich, Jianfeng Ma, TFL-DT: A trust evaluation
scheme for federated learning in digital twin for mobile networks, IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun. 41 (11) (2023) 3548–3560, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSAC.
2023.3310094.
[24] Xiaoming Wang, Jianwei Li, Zhiquan Liu, Quan Tang, Xixian Wang, Enabling
secure cross-modal search over encrypted data via federated learning, IEEE
Internet Things J. (2024) http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2024.3464760, 1–1.
[25] Yifan Zhang, Yinbin Miao, Xinghua Li, Linfeng Wei, Zhiquan Liu, Kim-
Kwang Raymond Choo, Robert H. Deng, Efficient privacy-preserving federated
learning with improved compressed sensing, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 20 (3)
(2024) 3316–3326, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.2023.3297596.
[26] Jingjing Guo, Haiyang Li, Feiran Huang, Zhiquan Liu, Yanguo Peng, Xinghua
Li, Jianfeng Ma, Varun G. Menon, Konstantin Kostromitin Igorevich, ADFL:
A poisoning attack defense framework for horizontal federated learning, IEEE
Trans. Ind. Inform. 18 (10) (2022) 6526–6536, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TII.
2022.3156645.
[27] Debasis Das, Toward next generation of blockchain using improvized bitcoin-NG,
IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst. 8 (2) (2021) 512–521.
[28] Yuhao Zhou, Qing Ye, Jiancheng Lv, Communication-efficient federated learning
with compensated overlap-FedAvg, IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. 33 (1)
(2022) 192–205.
[29] Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra, Jorge L, A public do-
main dataset for human activity recognition using smartphones, 21th Eur. Symp.
Artif. Neur. Netw. Comput. Intell. Mach. Learn. (2013) https://archive.ics.uci.
edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones, (Accessed
on 22/05/2023).
[30] Xudong Zhu, Hui Li, Yang Yu, Blockchain-based privacy preserving deep
learning, in: International Conference on Information Security and Cryptology,
Springer, 2018, pp. 370–383.
[31] Shaohua Wan, Lianyong Qi, Xiaolong Xu, Chao Tong, Zonghua Gu, Deep learning
models for real-time human activity recognition with smartphones, Mob. Netw.
Appl. 25 (2) (2020) 743–755.
[32] Maxence Noble, Aurélien Bellet, Aymeric Dieuleveut, Differentially private fed-
erated learning on heterogeneous data, in: International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics, PMLR, 2022, pp. 10110–10145.
[33] Truffle Suite, Sweet Tools for Smart Contracts, https://www.trufflesuite.com,
(Accessed on 20/05/2023).
[34] Giorgio Severi, Jim Meyer, Scott E. Coull, Alina Oprea, Explanation-guided
backdoor poisoning attacks against malware classifiers, in: USENIX Security
Symposium, 2021, pp. 1487–1504.
[35] Sagar Samtani, Hsinchun Chen, Murat Kantarcioglu, Bhavani Thuraisingham,
Explainable artificial intelligence for cyber threat intelligence (XAI-CTI), IEEE
Trans. Dependable Secur. Comput. 19 (04) (2022) 2149–2150.
[36] Sara Salim, Nour Moustafa, Mohamed Hassanian, David Ormod, Jill Slay,
Deep-federated-learning-based threat detection model for extreme satellite com-
munications, IEEE Internet Things J. 11 (3) (2024) 3853–3867, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/JIOT.2023.3301626.
Ad Hoc Networks 169 (2025) 103760 
13 
